THE
QUARTERLY JOURNAL
OF ECONOMICS
Vol. CXV Issue 3
August 2000
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY*
GEORGE A. AKERLOF AND RACHEL E. KRANTON
This paper considers how identity, a person’s sense of self, affects economic
outcomes. We incorporate the psychology and sociology of identity into an economic
model of behavior. In the utility function we propose, identity is associated with
different social categories and how people in these categories should behave. We
then construct a simple game-theoretic model showing how identity can affect
individual interactions. The paper adapts these models to gender discrimination in
the workplace, the economics of poverty and social exclusion, and the household
division of labor. In each case, the inclusion of identity substantively changes
conclusions of previous economic analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper introduces identity—a person’s sense of self—into
economic analysis. Identity can account for many phenomena that
current economics cannot well explain. It can comfortably resolve,
for example, why some women oppose ‘‘women’s rights,’’ as seen in
microcosm when Betty Friedan was ostracized by fellow suburban
* The authors especially wish to thank Abdeslam Maghraoui for his contin-
ued help and insights and Michael Ash, Jennifer Eichberger, and Cyd Fremmer for
invaluable research assistance. Henry Aaron, William Dickens, Claudia Goldin,
Edward Glaeser, Lawrence Katz, Robert Merton, Anand Swamy, and an anony-
mous referee made extensive comments on earlier drafts for which the authors are
particularly grateful. They also thank Robert Akerlof, Abhijit Banerjee, Kaushik
Basu, Paul Beaudry, Samuel Bowles, Robert Boyd, Gary Burtless, Alessandra
Casella, Catherine Eckel, Stuart Elliott, Gary Fields, Pierre Fortin, James Foster,
Richard Harris, Victoria Hattam, Peter Howett, Aurora Jackson, Kevin Lang,
George Loewenstein, Glenn Loury, Michael Kremer, David Laibson, Janet Pack,
Matthew Rabin, Francisco Rodriguez, Paul Romer, Eric Verhoogen, Eric Wanner,
Kent Weaver, Robin Wells, Janet Yellen, and Peyton Young for help and comments.
George Akerlof is grateful to the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, the
MacArthur Foundation, the Brookings Institution, and the National Science
Foundation, under research grant number SBR 97-09250, for financial support.
Rachel Kranton expresses her gratitude to the Russell Sage Foundation where she
was a Visiting Scholar for 1997–1998.
2000 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2000
715
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
716
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
housewives for writing The Feminine Mystique. Other problems
such as ethnic and racial conflict, discrimination, intractable
labor disputes, and separatist politics all invite an identity-based
analysis. Because of its explanatory power, numerous scholars in
psychology, sociology, political science, anthropology, and history
have adopted identity as a central concept. This paper shows how
identity can be brought into economic analysis, allowing a new
view of many economic problems.1
We incorporate identity into a general model of behavior and
then demonstrate how identity influences economic outcomes.
Specifically, we consider gender discrimination in the labor mar-
ket, the household division of labor, and the economics of social
exclusion and poverty. In each case, our analysis yields predic-
tions, supported by existing evidence, that are different from
those of existing economic models. The Conclusion indicates many
other realms where identity almost surely matters.
Our identity model of behavior begins with social difference.
Gender, a universally familiar aspect of identity, illustrates. There
are two abstract social categories, ‘‘man’’ and ‘‘woman.’’ These
categories are associated with different ideal physical attributes
and prescribed behaviors. Everyone in the population is assigned
a gender category, as either a ‘‘man’’ or a ‘‘woman.’’ Following
the behavioral prescriptions for one’s gender affirms one’s self-
image, or identity, as a ‘‘man’’ or as a ‘‘woman.’’2 Violating the
prescriptions evokes anxiety and discomfort in oneself and in
1. Previous economic literature on identity includes Folbre [1994] who
discusses the importance of gender identity for collective action that preserves
male privilege. Our general model of utility allows for this outcome, as well as
many other sources of gender inequality. Sen [1985] mentions identity as an
influence on goal achievement, but does not incorporate identity into a utility
function or models of specific economic settings. ‘‘Identity’’ also has other connota-
tions: Landa [1994] and Kevane [1994] consider how identity, defined as member-
ship in a particular group, affects economic transactions when individual members
are subject to group sanctions. Bowles and Gintis [1997] likewise consider
cooperation within a community.
2. We use the word prescriptions rather than norms because previous usage in
economics has given the latter term connotations that would be misleading in the
context of this paper. Here, agents follow prescriptions, for the most part, to
maintain their self-concepts. In contrast, in much of the economics literature, a
norm is obeyed because failure to do so results in punishment (e.g., Akerlof [1976],
Kandori [1992], and Cole, Mailath, and Postlewaite [1992]). Other authors,
however, see norms as something similar to our prescriptions. In Montgomery’s
[1997] game-theoretic model of social roles, agents adopt strategies that norms
assign their roles because otherwise they ‘‘would not recognize themselves.’’ Elster
[1989] writes that social norms are sustained by strong feelings of embarrassment,
anxiety, and guilt suffered from violating them. Huang and Wu [1994] also
consider social norms sustained by people’s emotions, which in the view of this
paper would result from a person’s sense of self.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 717
others. Gender identity, then, changes the ‘‘payoffs’’ from different
actions.
This modeling of identity is informed by a vast body of
research on the salience of social categories for human behavior
and interaction. We present in the next section a series of
examples of identity-related behavior. These examples, and other
evidence, indicate that (1) people have identity-based payoffs
derived from their own actions; (2) people have identity-based
payoffs derived from others’ actions; (3) third parties can generate
persistent changes in these payoffs; and (4) some people may
choose their identity, but choice may be proscribed for others.
The concept of identity expands economic analysis for at least
four corresponding reasons.
First, identity can explain behavior that appears detrimental.
People behave in ways that would be considered maladaptive or
even self-destructive by those with other identities. The reason for
this behavior may be to bolster a sense of self or to salve a
diminished self-image.
Second, identity underlies a new type of externality. One
person’s actions can have meaning for and evoke responses in
others. Gender again affords an example. A dress is a symbol of
femininity. If a man wears a dress, this may threaten the identity
of other men. There is an externality, and further externalities
result if these men make some response.
Third, identity reveals a new way that preferences can be
changed. Notions of identity evolve within a society and some in
the society have incentives to manipulate them. Obvious ex-
amples occur in advertising (e.g., Marlboro ads). As we shall
explore, there are many other cases, including public policies,
where changing social categories and associated prescriptions
affects economic outcomes.
Fourth, because identity is fundamental to behavior, choice of
identity may be the most important ‘‘economic’’ decision people
make. Individuals may—more or less consciously—choose who
they want to be. Limits on this choice may also be the most
important determinant of an individual’s economic well-being.
Previous economic analyses of, for example, poverty, labor supply,
and schooling have not considered these possibilities.
Our analysis proceeds as follows. In the next section we
propose a general utility function that incorporates identity as a
motivation for behavior. It introduces the vocabulary and theoreti-
cal framework used throughout the paper. This section also
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
718
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
justifies our inclusion of identity in a utility function, presenting a
series of examples of identity-related behavior. Section III then
constructs a prototype game-theoretic model of identity that
mirrors standard psychological theory. This model of two social
categories—Green and Red—contains the essential elements of
social differentiation, identity, and economic interaction. Sections
IV, V, and VI consider gender discrimination in the labor market,
the economics of poverty and social exclusion, and the household
division of labor, respectively. Section VII concludes and indicates
directions for future research.
II. UTILITY FUNCTION AND EVIDENCE OF
IDENTITY-RELATED BEHAVIOR
This section proposes a utility function that incorporates
identity as a motivation for behavior. We draw on extensive work
in psychology and discuss specific examples of behavior that
support our framework.
A. A Utility Function with Identity
In our utility function, identity is based on social categories,
C. Each person j has an assignment of people to these categories,
cj, so that each person has a conception of her own categories and
that of all other people.3 Prescriptions P indicate the behavior
appropriate for people in different social categories in different
situations. The prescriptions may also describe an ideal for each
category in terms of physical characteristics and other attributes.
Categories may also have higher or lower social status. We use the
word identity to describe both a person’s self-image as well as her
assigned categories.
Gender identity, as indicated earlier, could be formalized as
follows. There is a set of categories C, ‘‘man’’ and ‘‘woman,’’ where
men have higher social status than women. cj describes j’s own
gender category as well as j’s assignment for everyone else in the
population. P associates to each category basic physical and other
characteristics that constitute the ideal man or woman as well as
specifies behavior in different situations according to gender. E.g.,
the ideal woman is female, thin, and should always wear a dress;
3. An individual j’s mapping of another individual k into categories need not
correspond to k’s own mapping. In addition, social categories need not be mutually
exclusive, and an individual may be mapped into several social categories (e.g.,
individual j is both a ‘‘woman’’ and a ‘‘professional’’).
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 719
the ideal man is male, muscular, and should never wear a dress,
except perhaps on Halloween.
We propose the following utility function:
(1) Uj Uj(aj,a j,Ij).
Utility depends on j’s identity or self-image Ij, as well as on the
usual vectors of j’s actions, aj, and others’ actions, a j. Since aj
and a j determine j’s consumption of goods and services, these
arguments and Uj(·) are sufficient to capture the standard econom-
ics of own actions and externalities.
Following our discussion above, we propose the following
representation of Ij:
(2) Ij Ij(aj,a j;cj, j,P).
A person j’s identity Ij depends, first of all, on j’s assigned social
categories cj. The social status of a category is given by the
function Ij(·), and a person assigned a category with higher social
status may enjoy an enhanced self-image. Identity further de-
pends on the extent to which j’s own given characteristics j
match the ideal of j’s assigned category, indicated by the prescrip-
tions P.4 Finally, identity depends on the extent to which j’s own
and others’ actions correspond to prescribed behavior indicated by
P. We call increases or decreases in utility that derive from Ij,
gains or losses in identity.5
In the simplest case, an individual j chooses actions to
maximize utility (1), taking as given cj, j, and P and the actions of
others. We use the verb ‘‘choose’’ advisedly. We do not presume one
way or another that people are aware of their own motivations, as
in standard utility theory which is agnostic as to whether an
individual shopper is aware or not of the reasons for her choices.6
Beyond actions, to some extent an individual may also choose
the category assignment cj. Social categories may be more or less
ascriptive, and in general, the individual is likely to have some
4. In the case of a category with high (low) social status, a person j may gain
when own characteristics are close to (far from) from the ideal.
5. Since an individual’s self-concept may be formed by seeing oneself through
the eyes of others [Gleitman 1996, p. 343], these gains or losses may also depend on
how others interpret i’s actions. The opinions of others may be revealed through
actions a j; the individual may also care about others’ categorizations c j.
6. Sen [1997] makes the analogy that light does not know that it is
minimizing distance, but behaves as if it does. This notion follows Friedman’s
[1953] dicta for the methodology of positive economics. Whether or not j con-
sciously realizes she is maximizing a utility function such as (1), she does so
nevertheless. In our setting, in particular, the motivations for behavior may be
unconscious.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
720
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
choice over identity, as indeed people may even have some choice
over their gender. Again, this ‘‘choice’’ may be more or less
conscious.
Individual actions may also affect the prescriptions P, the set
of social categories C, as well as the status of different categories
reflected in Ij(·). With respect to gender, for example, status
differences between men and women have diminished over time,
and prescribed behavior and physical ideals have changed. Gen-
der categories themselves have become varied and complex. There
may be no universal agreement about social categories and
prescriptions. Indeed, they are the subject of much debate and
controversy.
B. Psychology and Experiments on Group Identification
The prominence of identity in psychology suggests that
economists should consider identity as an argument in utility
functions. Psychologists have long posited a self or ‘‘ego’’ as a
primary force of individual behavior. They have further associated
an individual’s sense of self to the social setting; identity is bound
to social categories; and individuals identify with people in some
categories and differentiate themselves from those in others.7
While experiments in social psychology do not show the
existence of a ‘‘self’’ or this identification per se, they do demon-
strate that even arbitrary social categorizations affect behavior.8
Consider the Robbers Cave experiment. In its initial week, two
groups of boys at a summer camp in Oklahoma were kept apart.
During this period, the boys developed norms of behavior and
identities as belonging to their group. When they met for a
tournament in the second week, the eleven-year-old equivalent of
war broke out, with name-calling, stereotyping, and fighting.
Later experiments show that competition is not necessary for
group identification and even the most minimal group assignment
can affect behavior. ‘‘Groups’’ form by nothing more than random
assignment of subjects to labels, such as even or odd. Subjects are
more likely to give rewards to those with the same label than to
those with other labels, even when choices are anonymous and
have no impact on own payoffs. Subjects also have higher opinions
of members of their own group.
7. For discussion of the ‘‘self,’’ see Thomas [1996], Breger [1974], or Gleitman
[1996]. For a review of the social psychology of identity, see Brown [1986] and
Wetherell [1996], and especially the work of Tajfel and Turner [1979].
8. For discussion of social psychology experiments, see Brown [1986, pp.
541–566] and Wetherell [1996, pp. 203–216].
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 721
Our modeling of identity exactly parallels these experiments.
In the experiments, as in our utility function (1), there are social
categories; there is an assignment of subjects to those social
categories; finally, subjects have in mind some form of assignment-
related prescriptions, else rewards would not depend on group
assignment.
C. Examples of Identity-Related Behavior
We next present a set of ‘‘real-world’’ examples of four
different ways, outlined in the introduction and formalized in our
utility function, that identity may influence behavior.
Our first set demonstrates that people have identity-related
payoffs from their own actions. The impact of an action aj on
utility Uj depends in part on its effect on identity Ij.
Self-Mutilation. The first of these examples is perhaps the
most dramatic: people mutilate their own or their children’s
bodies as an expression of identity. Tattooing, body-piercing (ear,
nose, navel, etc.), hair conking, self-starvation, steroid abuse,
plastic surgery, and male and female circumcision all yield
physical markers of belonging to more or less explicit social
categories and groups.9 In terms of our utility function, these
practices transform an individual’s physical characteristics to
match an ideal.10 The mutilation may occur because people
believe it leads to pecuniary rewards and interactions such as
marriage. But the tenacity and defense of these practices indicate
the extent to which belonging relies on ritual, and people have
internalized measures of beauty and virtue.11
Gender and Occupations. Female trial lawyer, male nurse,
woman Marine—all conjure contradictions. Why? Because trial
9. See Khatibi [1986] for analysis of how marking the body, by circumcision
and tribal tattoos, marks the self.
10. An alternative explanation is that these practices are signals of some
unobserved economically relevant attribute. However, it is hard to imagine why
individual costs of these signals would be correlated with these attributes.
11. In a study of sexuality in rural Egypt, Khattab [1996] reports that women
consider female circumcision a beautifying practice. It accentuates the difference
between the sexes: ‘‘We don’t want to look like a man with a protruding organ’’ [p.
20]. Bumiller [1990] reports an example of female defense of female self-sacrifice.
Both men and women journeyed to pay their respects after a young woman
committed sati in a Rajasthani village in 1987. Sati is the practice of the widow
burning to death on her husband’s funeral pyre. One devotee expressed her
admiration: ‘‘If I had known she was going to do this I would have touched her feet.
Now I will give her a place in my house and worship her every day.’’ This respect is
no less diminished by admirers’ doubts that they would have had the same courage
or by their ignorance of the pressure on the widow from her in-laws.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
722
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
lawyers are viewed as masculine, nurses as feminine, and a
Marine as the ultimate man. People in these occupations but of
the opposite sex often have ambiguous feelings about their work.
In terms of our utility function, an individual’s actions do not
correspond to gender prescriptions of behavior. A revealing study
in this regard is Pierce’s [1995] participant-observer research on
the legal profession.12 Female lawyers thought of themselves as
women, yet being a good lawyer meant acting like a man. Lawyers
were told in training sessions to act like ‘‘Rambo’’ and to ‘‘take no
prisoners.’’ In the office, trial attorneys who did not ‘‘win big’’ were
described as ‘‘having no balls.’’ Intimidation of witnesses was
‘‘macho blasts against the other side.’’ A Christmas skit about two
partners dramatized the gender conflict:
[O]ne secretary dressed up as Rachel and another dressed up as
Michael. The secretary portraying Michael . . . ran around the stage barking
orders and singing, ‘‘I’m Michael Bond, I’m such a busy man. I’m such a busy
man.’’ The other secretary followed suit by barking orders and singing, ‘‘I’m
Rachel Rosen, I’m such a busy man, I mean woman. I’m such a busy man, I
mean woman. . . .’’ Michael responded to the spoof in stride. . . . Rachel, on
the other hand, was very upset [Pierce, 1995, p. 130].
Female lawyers expressed their ambivalence in many discus-
sions. ‘‘Candace,’’ another partner, told Pierce: ‘‘I had forgotten
how much anger I’ve buried over the years about what happened
to the woman who became a lawyer. . . . To be a lawyer, some-
where along the way, I made a decision that it meant acting like a
man. To do that I squeezed the female part of me into a box, put on
the lid, and tucked it away’’ [Pierce 1995, p. 134].
Alumni Giving. Charitable contributions may yield a ‘‘warm
glow’’ [Andreoni 1989], but how do people choose one organization
over another? Charity to the organization with the highest
marginal return would maximize its economic impact. Yet, at least
for higher education, contributions may well reflect identity.
Graduates give to their own alma mater. Alumni giving could
enhance the value of a degree by maintaining an institution’s
reputation. But this explanation suffers from the collective action
problem. And it does not account for student loyalty and identifica-
tion with an institution, as expressed in such lyrics as ‘‘For God,
for country, and for Yale.’’
12. For a study of nurses and Marines, see Williams [1989].
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 723
Mountaineering. Why do people climb mountains? Loewen-
stein [1998] argues that facing the extreme discomfort and danger
of mountaineering enhances an individual’s sense of self.
Our second set of examples demonstrates that people have
identity-related payoffs from others’ actions. The effect of an
action a j on utility includes an impact on Ij.
Gender and Occupations. A woman working in a ‘‘man’s’’ job
may make male colleagues feel less like ‘‘men.’’ To allay these
feelings, they may act to affirm their masculinity and act against
female coworkers. In her study of coal handlers in a power plant,
Padavic [1991] interpreted the behavior of her male coworkers in
this way. On one occasion, they picked her up, tossed her back and
forth, and attempted to push her onto the coal conveyer belt
(jokingly, of course). In the case of another worker, no one trained
her, no one helped her, and when she asked for help, she was
refused assistance that would have been routine for male
coworkers.13
To further assay the reasons for such behavior, we took a
random-sample telephone survey relating a vignette about a
female carpenter at a construction company who was ‘‘baited and
teased’’ by a male coworker. We see in Table I that among the six
possible explanations, 84 percent of the respondents said it was
‘‘somewhat likely,’’ ‘‘likely,’’ or ‘‘very likely’’ that the male worker
behaved in this way because he felt less masculine.14 This
explanation was one of the most popular, and more than three-
quarters of the respondents thought that a woman in a man’s job
‘‘frequently’’ or ‘‘almost always’’ faces such treatment.
Manhood and Insult. For a man, an action may be viewed as
an insult which, if left unanswered, impugns his masculinity. As
in the example above, an action a j impacts Ij which may be
countered by an action aj. Psychologists Nisbett and Cohn [1996]
have detected such identity concerns in experiments at the
13. Levine [1997] also found that men often refused to train women and
sabotaged their work. In addition, women in men’s jobs were subject to sexual
innuendo. For a collection of such examples see Schultz [1998].
14. Differences in response by gender were negligible. The survey included
three other vignettes, two of which described a man (woman) contemplating a
switch to a predominantly female (male) occupation. Responses indicate that
gender could be of concern in such a decision. The responses were uninformative,
however, when the switch was otherwise undesirable so that any gender conflict
would be moot. Responses to the last vignette strongly suggest that identity
considerations are a major reason for taking the time to vote. Our sample was half
male, half female, and 60 percent college graduates.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
724
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE I
VIGNETTE CONCERNING HARASSMENT AND EVALUATION OF POSSIBLE EXPLANATIONS
Vignette: Paul is a carpenter for a construction company. The company has just
hired Christine, its first female carpenter, for 3 dollars less per hour than it
pays Paul and the other carpenters. On Christine’s first day of work, Paul and
two of his coworkers bait and tease Christine, making it difficult for her to do
her job.
Try to imagine why Paul behaved as he did. Rate each of the following explana-
tions for Paul’s behavior as not-at-all likely, not likely, somewhat likely, likely,
or very likely.
Explanation
Fraction
somewhat
likely, likely,
or very likelya,b
Average
score c
Paul put Christine down because he is afraid that by
hiring a woman the company can lower his wage.
Paul put Christine down because he does not feel that
it is fair that Christine is getting a lower wage.
Paul put Christine down because he feels less mascu-
line when a woman is doing the same job.
Paul put Christine down because he feels he and his
friends will not be able to joke around if a woman is
present.
Paul put Christine down because he is afraid that
other men will tease him if a woman is doing the
same job.
Paul put Christine down because he is afraid that
people will think that his job requires less skill if a
woman is doing the same job.
Paul put Christine down because he is afraid that if
he does not, then his male coworkers will start to
tease him.
Paul put Christine down because he feels that it is
wrong for women to work in a man’s job.
.36
(.06)
.13
(.04)
.84
(.04)
.84
(.04)
.76
(.05)
.64
(.06)
.80
(.05)
.77
(.05)
2.5
(.12)
1.7
(.12)
3.4
(.12)
3.6
(.12)
3.3
(.13)
2.9
(.12)
3.4
(.13)
3.2
(.14)
a. Sample size is 70 households. Households were selected randomly from the Fremont, CA phonebook.
b. Standard errors are in parentheses.
c. Average with not-at-all likely 1, not likely 2, somewhat likely 3, likely 4, very likely 5.
University of Michigan. These experiments, they argue, reveal
remnants of the white antebellum Southern ‘‘culture of honor’’ in
disparate reactions to insult of males from the U. S. South and
North.15 Their experiments involved variations of the following
15. For a description of this ‘‘culture of honor,’’ see also Butterfield [1995].
‘‘Gentlemen’’ reacted to insult by engaging in duels. Those of lower class fought
with hands and fists with no holds barred, so that fights extended to such
extremities as eyes, ears, and nose.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 725
scenario: an associate of the experimenters bumped subjects in
the hallway as they made their way to the experiment. Rather
than apologizing, the associate called the subject ‘‘asshole.’’ In-
sulted Southerners were more likely than insulted Northerners
and control Southerners to fill in subsequent word-completion
tests with aggressive words (for example, g-un rather than f-un)
and had raised cortisol levels.
Most revealing that the insult affected identity, insulted
Southerners were also more likely to fear that the experimenter
had a low opinion of their masculinity. They will probably never
meet the experimenter or the hallway accomplice again; their
encounter in the experiment is otherwise anonymous. Their
concern about the experimenter then can only be a concern about
how they feel about themselves, about their own sense of identity,
as perceived through the ‘‘mirror of the opinions and expectations
of others’’ [Gleitman 1996, p. 343]. We see the same psychology in
other examples.
Changing Groups or Violating Prescriptions. Because of j’s
identification with others, it may affect j’s identity when another
person in j’s social category violates prescriptions or becomes a
different person.16 A common response is scorn and ostracism,
which distances oneself from the maverick and affirms one’s own
self-image. Such behavior occurs daily in school playgrounds,
where children who behave differently are mocked and taunted.
Those who seek upward mobility are often teased by their peers,
as in A Hope in the Unseen [Suskind 1998], which describes Cedric
Jennings’ progress from one of Washington’s most blighted high
schools to Brown University. The book opens with Cedric in the
high-school chemistry lab, escaping the catcalls of the crowd at an
awards assembly. Those who try to change social categories and
prescriptions may face similar derision because the change may
devalue others’ identity, as for the housewives in Betty Friedan’s
suburb.
Our third set of examples demonstrates that to some extent
people choose their identity; that is, cj may be partially a choice.
Many women in the United States can choose either to be a career
woman or a housewife (see Gerson [1986]). Parents often choose a
school—public versus private, secular versus parochial—to influ-
16. the next section.
We discuss the psychology of identification and its implications further in
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
726
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
ence a child’s self-image, identification with others, and behav-
ior.17 The choice of where to live at college can both reflect and
change how students think of themselves. Fraternities, sororities,
African-American, or other ‘‘theme’’-oriented dorms are all associ-
ated with social groups, self-images, and prescribed behavior.18
The list can continue. The choice for an immigrant to become a
citizen is not only a change in legal status but a change in identity.
The decision is thus often fraught with ambivalence, anxiety, and
even guilt.
Identity ‘‘choice,’’ however, is very often limited. In a society
with racial and ethnic categories, for example, those with nondis-
tinguishing physical features may be able to ‘‘pass’’ as a member of
another group. But others will be constrained by their appear-
ance, voice, or accent.
Our fourth set of examples demonstrates the creation and
manipulation of social categories C and prescriptions P.19
Advertising. Advertising is an obvious attempt to manipu-
late prescriptions. Marlboro and Virginia Slims advertisements,
for example, promote an image of the ideal man or woman
complete with the right cigarette.20
Professional and Graduate Schools. Graduate and profes-
sional programs try to mold students’ behavior through a change
in identity. As a ‘‘one-L’’ Harvard Law School student said: ‘‘ ‘They
are turning me into someone else. They’re making me different’ ’’
[Turow 1977, p. 73]. In medicine, theology, the military, and the
doctorate, a title is added to a graduate’s name, suggesting the
change in person.
Political Identity. Politics is often a battle over identity.21
Rather than take preferences as given, political leaders and
17. Catholic schools in the United States at the end of the nineteenth century
were a bridge between immigrants’ old European identities and their new
American selves [Bryk, Lee, and Holland 1993, p. 27]. Muslim schools, whose
enrollment is currently growing, are partly refuges from public school systems, but
parents also choose them to instill in their children a Muslim identity and respect
for behavioral prescriptions, and to counter what many view as a distorted image
of Muslims and Islam in America [Sachs 1998].
18. For an anthropological study of identity, fraternities, and prescriptions for
brothers’ behavior, see Sanday [1990].
19. The social evolution and construction of group distinctions and social
categories is the subject of much research. For a survey, see Wetherell [1996, pp.
219–227].
20. See de Grazia’s [1996] volume for historical studies of advertising and
other influences on gender and consumption.
21. For theory and analysis of political identity, see Norton [1988].
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 727
activists often strive to change a population’s preferences through
a change in identity or prescriptions.22 Again, examples abound.
Fascist and populist leaders are infamous for their rhetoric
fostering racial and ethnic divisions, with tragic consequences.
Symbolic acts and transformed identities spur revolutions. The
ringing of the Liberty Bell called on the colonists’ identities as
Americans. Gandhi’s Salt March sparked an Indian national
identity. The French Revolution changed subjects into citizens,
and the Russian Revolution turned them into comrades.
III. ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY: A PROTOTYPE MODEL
In this section we construct a prototype model of economic
interaction in a world where identity is based on social difference.
In addition to the usual tastes, utility from actions will also
depend on identity. Identity will depend on two social categories—
Green and Red—and the correspondence of own and others’
actions to behavioral prescriptions for their category.
A. A Prototype Model
We begin with standard economic motivations for behavior.
There are two possible activities, Activity One and Activity Two.
There is a population of individuals each of whom has a taste for
either Activity One or Two. If a person with a taste for Activity
One (Two) undertakes Activity One (Two), she earns utility V. An
individual who chooses the activity that does not match her taste
earns zero utility. In a standard model of utility maximization,
each person would engage in the activity corresponding to her
taste.
We next construct identity-based preferences. We suppose
that there are two social categories, Green and Red. We assume
the simplest division of the population into categories; all persons
think of themselves and others as Green.23 We add simple
behavioral prescriptions: a Green should engage in Activity One
(in contrast to Reds who engage in Activity Two). Anyone who
chooses Activity Two is not a ‘‘true’’ Green—she would lose her
22. Romer [1994] has considered the possibility that politicians can manipu-
late voters’ emotions, in particular their ‘‘anger,’’ and thereby affect political
outcomes.
23. Of course, it is possible that not everyone thinks of herself as Green. We
discuss the possibility of different identities and other extensions to the model
below.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
728
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Green identity. This loss in identity entails a reduction in utility of
Is, where the subscript s stands for ‘‘self.’’ In addition, there are
identity externalities. If an i and j are paired, Activity Two on the
part of i diminishes j’s Green identity. j has a loss in utility Io,
where the subscript o denotes ‘‘other.’’ After i has committed
Activity Two, j may ‘‘respond.’’ The response restores j’s identity
at a cost c, while entailing a loss to i in amount L.24
Figure I represents an interaction between an individual
with a taste for Activity One (‘‘Person One’’) and an individual
with a taste for Activity Two (‘‘Person Two’’). Person One chooses
an activity first.25
This model can be expressed by ideas central to the psycho-
dynamic theory of personality, found in almost any psychology
text.26 In personality development, psychologists agree on the
importance of internalization of rules for behavior. Freud called
this process the development of the superego. Modern scholars
disagree with Freud on the importance of psychosexual factors in
an individual’s development, but they agree on the importance of
anxiety that a person experiences when she violates her internal-
ized rules. One’s identity, or ego, or self, must be constantly
‘‘defended against anxiety in order to limit disruption and main-
tain a sense of unity’’ [Thomas 1996, p. 284]. In terms of our model,
Person Two’s internalization of prescriptions causes her to suffer a
loss in utility of Is if she chooses Activity Two. To avoid this
anxiety, she may refrain from that activity.
Identification is a critical part of this internalization process:
a person learns a set of values (prescriptions) such that her
actions should conform with the behavior of some people and
contrast with that of others. If Person One has internalized
prescriptions via such identifications, another person’s violation
of the prescriptions will cause anxiety for Person One.27 In our
model, this anxiety is modeled as a loss in utility of Io. Person
One’s response, in our language, restores her identity, and in
terms of the psychology textbook relieves her anxiety and main-
24. In Rabin’s [1993] theory of fairness, agents are willing to pay to be ‘‘mean’’
to those who are ‘‘mean’’ to them. The similarity is probably no coincidence. A likely
reason for such a response is preservation of self-image.
25. Since Person One never chooses Activity Two in a subgame perfect
equilibrium, we suppress this branch of the tree.
26. See, for example, Gleitman [1996, Chapter 17], Thomas [1996], and
Breger [1974].
27. The violation arouses emotions that Person One has repressed in the
process of internalizing the behavioral rules. The psychoanalytic theory, then,
suggests unconscious motivations for behavior.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 729
FIGURE I
Game Tree of Interaction between Person One and Person Two
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
730
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
tains her sense of unity. Person One no longer loses Io, although
she does incur c.28
B. Equilibrium Outcomes
There are four possible subgame perfect outcomes of the game
in Figure I.
(i) Person One deters Person Two from engaging in Activity
Two, when c Io and Is V Is L.
(ii) Person One responds but does not deter Person Two from
engaging in Activity Two, when c Io and Is L V.
(iii) Person One does not respond, and Person Two engages in
Activity Two, when c Io and Is V.
(iv) Person Two does not engage in Activity Two regardless of
Person One’s response, when Is V.
This simple model affords three lessons. First, as discussed
earlier, the model establishes the connection between economic
interactions and the psychology of identity, especially the implica-
tions of identification. Second, the model allows a comparative
static analysis on identity-related parameters. Finally, the elemen-
tary assumptions of the model suggest extensions that entail
greater realism and further implications of identity for economic
interaction.
C. Comparative Statics
Comparative statics show how traditional economic policies
can affect behavior in this setting. For example, a ‘‘tax’’ T on the
response to Activity Two will affect the equilibrium outcome in
case (i). For a sufficiently high tax (T Io c), Person One’s
response to Activity Two is no longer credible, and Person Two will
switch from Activity One to Activity Two. This policy benefits
Person Two at the expense of Person One. Total utility changes
from V to 2V Is Io, a positive change if V exceeds Is Io.29 A
policy with the opposite effect is a tax on Activity Two itself. This
policy would benefit Person One at the expense of Person Two in
cases (ii) and (iii). In the first (second) case, a tax in excess of V
Is L (V Is) induces Person Two to desist from Activity Two.
This policy would increase total utility, in the first case, if V
28. Another basis for the model is the psychology of cognitive dissonance.
When Person Two engages in Activity Two, she challenges the validity of Person
One’s beliefs, and Person One suffers from cognitive dissonance. To remove this
dissonance, Person One may act against Person Two.
29. Of course, such a ‘‘welfare analysis’’ is subject to the usual caveats
concerning interpersonal comparisons and the measurability of utility.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 731
c Is L, and, in the second case, if V Io Is. Finally, policies
may change the prescriptions themselves. A rhetorical campaign,
for example, may make Activity Two more loathsome to Greens,
leading to higher values of Is and Io and greater conformity to the
prescriptions. Of course, a different campaign could have the
opposite effect.
These policies are identity examples of the conflict of the
Paretian Liberal [Sen 1970]. It is not possible to protect Person
One against the externalities caused by Person Two’s choice of
Activity Two and at the same time protect Person Two from
Person One’s response. There is a conflict between protecting
individuals who engage in certain activities and suppressing
these same activities that may cause others discomfort and
anxiety.
D. Extensions to the Model and the Definition of ‘‘Situations’’
Different assumptions about identity, pairings, and informa-
tion all yield potentially interesting extensions to the model. As in
the basic model, individual behavior would depend on what
sociologists would call the ‘‘situation’’—who is matched with
whom and in what context.30 In the basic model, everyone shared
the same identity and prescriptions, but there could be, more
realistically, many identities among the population. Activities
One and Two could have different meanings for different people.
For example, by choosing Activity Two, a person could affirm her
identity as a Red. People could also choose—more or less con-
sciously—their identities as well as their activities. These choices
could depend on the probability of different matchings, or situa-
tions.31 We will explore this possibility below in our study of
poverty and social exclusion.
Furthermore, pairings need not be exogenous, nor tastes and
prescriptions known. In fact, much conflict occurs because people
with different prescriptions or identities come into contact. To
avoid conflict and losses in utility, people may want to match with
those who share the same identity or for whom actions have the
same meaning. Thus, the matching process itself—the ‘‘situa-
30. When an individual’s identity is associated with multiple social catego-
ries, the ‘‘situation’’ could determine, for example, which categories are most
salient.
31. Choice could also depend on frequency of certain actions. Kuran [1998]
considers ethnically symbolic activities in a model where people care about
belonging to an ethnic group. When greater overall resources are devoted to an
ethnic activity, an individual’s marginal utility from this activity can increase,
leading to an ‘‘ethnification’’ cascade.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
732
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
tions’’ in which agents find themselves—can be endogenous,
driven by prescriptions and identities. We will see this outcome
below in our first, and perhaps most obvious application.
IV. IDENTITY , GENDER, AND ECONOMICS IN THE WORKPLACE
An identity theory of gender in the workplace expands the
economic analysis of occupational segregation. As recently as
1970, two-thirds of the United States’ female or male labor force
would have had to switch jobs to achieve occupational parity. This
measure of occupational segregation remained virtually un-
changed since the beginning of the century. Yet, in twenty years,
from 1970 to 1990, this figure declined to 53 percent.32 An identity
model points to changes in societal notions of male and female as a
major cause.
The model we propose captures the ‘‘auras of gender’’ [Goldin
1990a] that have pervaded the labor market. Occupations are
associated with the social categories ‘‘man’’ and ‘‘woman,’’ and
individual payoffs from different types of work reflect these
gender associations. This model can explain patterns of occupa-
tional segregation that have eluded previous models. It also
directly captures the consequences of the women’s movement and
affords a new economic interpretation of sex discrimination law.
Identity also provides a microfoundation for earlier models.
The ‘‘distaste’’ of men for working with women, as in the crudest
adaptations of racial discrimination models [Becker 1971; Arrow
1972], can be understood as due to loss in male identity when
women work in a man’s job. Similarly women’s assumed lower
desire for labor force participation (as in Mincer and Polachek
[1974], Bulow and Summers [1986], and Lazear and Rosen [1990])
can be understood as the result of their identity as homemakers.33
A. The Model34
There are two social categories, ‘‘men’’ and ‘‘women,’’ with
prescriptions of appropriate activities for each. A firm wishes to
32. See Goldin [1990a, Chapter 3] for historical measures of occupational
segregation. See Blau, Simpson, and Anderson [1998], who use Census Bureau
three-digit classifications of occupations, for 1970–1990 figures.
33. In Bergmann [1974], male employers are averse to hiring women for
particular jobs and may collude to keep women out of high paying occupations,
reserving the gains for other males. In our theory, the source of occupational
segregation is empirically motivated—the maintenance of gender identity on the
part of employees.
34. An appendix with complete specification of the model is available from the
authors upon request.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 733
hire labor to perform a task. By the initial prescriptions, this task
is appropriate only for men; it is a ‘‘man’s job.’’ Relative to a
‘‘woman’s job,’’ women lose identity in amount Is by performing
such work.35 In this situation, male coworkers suffer a loss Io.36
They may relieve their anxiety by taking action against women
coworkers,37 reducing everyone’s productivity.
To avoid these productivity losses, the firm may change
gender-job associations at a cost. The firm is likely to create a
‘‘woman’s job’’ alongside the ‘‘man’s job,’’ rather than render the
whole task gender neutral, when a new job description can
piggyback on existing notions of male and female.38 A well-known
historical example illustrates. In the nineteenth century, Horace
Mann (as Secretary of Education for Massachusetts) transformed
elementary school teaching into a woman’s job, arguing that
women were ‘‘more mild and gentle,’’ ‘‘of purer morals,’’ with
‘‘stronger parental impulses.’’39 Secondary school teaching and
school administration remained jobs for men.
The model also indicates why gender-job associations may
persist. If associations are sectorwide or economywide, and not
firm-specific, perfectly competitive firms will underinvest in new
job categories. Benefits would accrue to other firms. In the
absence of market power or technological change, a shift in social
attitudes and legal intervention would be necessary for changes in
employment patterns.
The model easily extends to the decision to participate in the
labor force. If women’s identity is enhanced by work inside the
home, they will have lower labor force attachment than men.
Historically, female labor force participation rates, relative to
male rates, have been both lower and more cyclically variable.
B. Implications for Labor Market Outcomes
This identity model explains employment patterns arising
from associations between gender and type of work. These pat-
35. Blau and Ferber [1986, Chapter 7] also discuss the ‘‘psychic costs’’
incurred by a woman (man) working in a job requiring ‘‘masculine’’ (‘‘feminine’’)
traits.
36. Goldin [1990b] considers a model where men lose ‘‘status’’ when women
work on their jobs because the jobs are revealed to be less difficult or physically
demanding.
37. We have already seen such emotions and behavior in Pierce’s [1995] law
firm and Padavic’s [1991] power plant. Schultz [1998] relates a plethora of similar
cases.
38. A firm with market power will earn a further bonus from occupational
segregation in the form of wage discrimination.
39. See quotation of Mann in Sugg [1978, p. 74], and other Annual Reports by
Mann.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
734
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
terns go beyond what can be explained by women’s assumed lower
labor force attachment as in Mincer and Polachek [1974], where
women work in occupations that require little investment in
firm-specific human capital.40
In our model, women will dominate jobs whose requirements
match construed female attributes and inferior social status; men
eschew them. Historically, three occupations illustrate: secretar-
ies (97.8 percent female in 197041) have often been called ‘‘office
wives,’’ and elements of sexuality are inscribed in the working
relationship (boss male, secretary female) [MacKinnon 1979;
Pringle 1988]. Secretaries are expected to serve their bosses, with
deference, and to be attentive to their personal needs [Davies
1982; Kanter 1977; Pierce 1996]. Elementary school teachers
(83.9 percent female), in contrast to secondary school teachers
(49.6 percent female), are supposed to care for young children.
Nurses (97.3 percent female) are supposed to be tender and care
for patients, as well as be deferential to doctors [Fisher 1995;
Williams 1989].
In our model, women do not enter male professions because of
gender associations. Historically, many male professions have
required similar levels of education and training to female
professions and could have been amenable to part-time and
intermittent work. Contrast nursing and teaching with account-
ing and law. All require college degrees and certification, and
sometimes have tenure and experience-based pay. Only the very
top of these professions have required continuity in employment
and full-time work.
Rhetoric surrounding job shifts from male to female further
demonstrates the salience of gender-job associations. The recruit-
ment of women into ‘‘men’s jobs’’ during World War II, for example,
was accompanied by official propaganda and popular literature
picturing women taking on factory work without loss of femininity
[Milkman 1987; Honey 1984; Pierson 1986]. In addition, the jobs
40. The empirical evidence for this human capital explanation is mixed (see
Blau, Simpson, and Anderson [1998] for review). Other theories based on low
workplace attachment of women include Lazear and Rosen [1990], where occupa-
tional segregation is a form of statistical discrimination; workers in the male
occupations, i.e., with high labor force attachment, are targets for promotion, and
those in the female occupations are not. In Bulow and Summers [1986], primary-
sector firms must pay women higher wage premiums to prevent them from
shirking because women are more likely to quit their jobs. These firms, therefore,
prefer hiring men to women.
41. See Blau, Simpson, and Anderson [1998, Appendix A-1] for these and
following figures. All figures here are for 1970.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 735
were portrayed as temporary; only the wartime emergency ex-
cused the violation of the usual gender prescriptions.
C. Effects of the Women’s Movement
The model gives a theoretical structure for how the women’s
movement may have impacted the labor market. The movement’s
goals included reshaping societal notions of femininity (and
masculinity) and removing gender associations from tasks, both
in the home and in the workplace. In the model, such changes
would decrease women’s gains (men’s losses) in identity from
homemaking, and decrease the identity loss Is of women (men)
working in traditionally men’s (women’s) jobs, as well as the
accompanying externalities Io. These shifts would increase wom-
en’s labor force participation and lead to a convergence of male
and female job tenure rates. More women (men) would work in
previously male (female) jobs.
All these outcomes are observed coincidental with and follow-
ing the women’s movement.42 Gender-job associations diminished,
reflected in changes in language (e.g., firemen became firefight-
ers). In 1998 the median job tenure of employed women over 25
was 0.4 years lower than that of men; in 1968 that gap had been
3.3 years.43 Changes in sex composition within occupations ac-
counted for the major share of decline in occupational segregation
from 1970–1990 [Blau, Simpson, and Anderson, 1998]. Of the 45
three-digit Census occupations that were 0.0 percent female in
1970, only one (supervisors: brickmasons, stonemasons, and tile
setters) was less than 1 percent female twenty years later.44 Many
incursions of females into male-dominated professions were very
large. Consider again accounting and law. In 1970 (1990) females
were 24.6 (52.7) percent of auditors and accountants, and 4.5
(24.5) percent of lawyers. Not only did the proportion of women in
men’s jobs increase, but so did the proportion of men in women’s
jobs (albeit much less dramatically).45 Of the triumvirate of
42. The Feminine Mystique was published in 1963, and the National Organi-
zation for Women was founded in 1966.
43. 3.8 years for men versus 3.4 for women in 1998 [United States Depart-
ment of Labor, 1998]; 7.1 years for men versus 3.8 for women in 1968. [Source:
calculation from Table A, U. S. Department of Labor, Special Labor Force Report
112, Job Tenure of Workers, January 1968.] The figures for the two years are not
strictly comparable; in 1968 the question asked for the time elapsed since the
beginning of the current job, in 1998 since the current employer. Median male job
tenure has also been considerably affected by shifts in the age distribution of the
workforce, both because of demographic shifts and also early retirement.
44. Source: Blau, Simpson, and Anderson [1998, Appendix A-1].
45. See Blau, Simpson, and Anderson [1998, Table 3 and Appendix A-1].
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
736
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
explanations for such increases—technology, endowments, and
tastes—elimination makes tastes the leading suspect, since there
was no dramatic change in technology or endowments that would
have caused such increased mixing on the job.46 Legal initiatives
discussed next reflect such changes in tastes.
D. Gender-Job Associations and Sex Discrimination Law
Legal interpretations of sex discrimination correspond to
earlier economic models as well as our own. Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 makes it unlawful for an employer to discrimi-
nate ‘‘against any individual . . . with respect to . . . compensation,
terms, conditions . . . of employment’’ or ‘‘to [adversely] limit,
segregate, or classify his employees . . . because of . . . sex.’’47 At its
most basic, this law prohibits a discriminatory exercise of ‘‘tastes’’
against women (analogous to Becker [1971] and Arrow [1972]).
Courts also interpret Title VII as outlawing statistical discrimina-
tion by sex or criteria correlated with sex, even when women on
average lack a desirable job qualification. Discriminatory hiring
because of women’s presumed lower workplace attachment, as in
Lazear and Rosen [1990], was precisely the issue addressed in
Phillips v. Martin-Marietta.48
Our model, where sex discrimination occurs because jobs
have gender associations, corresponds to a wider interpretation of
Title VII. This interpretation is at the forefront of current legal
debate and is supported by a number of precedents. In Diaz v. Pan
American World Airways,49 the Court outlawed sex bans in hiring.
The airline originally pleaded for their prohibition of male flight
attendants because women were better at ‘‘the nonmechanical
aspects of the job.’’ But this association of gender with the job was
disallowed on appeal since feminine traits were deemed irrelevant
to the ‘‘primary function or services offered’’ (cited in MacKinnon
[1979, p. 180]). Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins50 set a precedent for
workers already hired. The plaintiff had been denied a partner-
ship after negative evaluations for her masculine deportment.
The Supreme Court ruled that ‘‘an employer who objects to
46. Computers are used intensively in few of the occupations with major
changes in mix.
47. 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e–2000e17 [1982], Sections 703(a)(1) and 703(a)(2).
48. 442 F. 2d 385 (5th Cir. 1971), cert. denied, 404 U.S. 950 (1971). Griggs v.
Duke Power, 401 U.S. 424 (1971), a race discrimination case, is an important
precedent outlawing test results and other criteria correlated with race or gender
as employment screens.
49. 442 F.2d 385 (5th Cir.) cert. denied, 404 U. S. 950 (1971).
50. 490 U. S. 228 (1989).
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 737
aggressiveness in women but whose positions require this trait
places women in an intolerable and impermissible Catch 22’’
(cited in Wurzburg and Klonoff [1997, p. 182]). Cases have also
involved harassment of women working in men’s jobs as, in the
terminology of our model, male coworkers protect themselves
from loss of identity Io. Berkman v. City of New York51 reinstated a
firefighter who had been dismissed because of substandard work
performance. The Court ruled that the interference and harass-
ment by her male coworkers made it impossible for her to perform
her job adequately [Schultz 1998, p. 1770]. This expansive inter-
pretation of a ‘‘hostile work environment,’’ a category of sexual
harassment which is in turn a category of sex discrimination, has
been exceptional. Judges have viewed sexual desire as an essen-
tial element of sexual harassment. However, Schultz [1998] and
Franke [1995] argue that any harassment derived from gender
prescriptions has discriminatory implications (as depicted in our
model) and are thus violations of Title VII.
V. IDENTITY AND THE ECONOMICS OF EXCLUSION AND POVERTY
This section will consider identity and behavior in poor and
socially excluded communities. In an adaptation of the previous
model of Greens and Reds, people belonging to poor, socially
excluded groups will choose their identity. Greens identify with
the dominant culture, while those with Red identity reject it and
the subordinate position assigned to those of their ‘‘race,’’ class, or
ethnicity.52 From the point of view of those with Green identities,
Reds are often making bad economic decisions; they might even be
described as engaging in self-destructive behavior. Taking drugs,
joining a gang, and becoming pregnant at a young age are possible
signs of a Red identity. This aspect of behavior has not been
explored in previous models, but it is implicit in Wilson’s account
of black ghetto poverty [1987, 1996]. It also is implicit in every
51. 580 F. Supp. 226 (E.D.N.Y. 1983), aff’d, 755 F. 2d 913 (2d Cir. 1985).
Berkman followed the expansive view in McKinney v. Dole, 765 F. 2d 1129 (D.C.
Cir. 1985), that ‘‘any harassment or unequal treatment of an employee or group of
employees that would not occur but for the sex of the employee or employees may, if
sufficiently patterned or pervasive, comprise an illegal condition of employment
under Title VII’’ (cited in Schultz [1998, p. 1733]).
52. Much literature on identity and social exclusion argues that dominant
groups define themselves vis-a`-vis ‘‘other(s),’’ and members of the dominant
(excluded) groups benefit (lose)—materially and psychologically—from the differ-
entiation. For discussion of different approaches to the study of social difference
and racism, see Wetherell [1996].
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
738
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
study that finds significant dummy variables for ‘‘race,’’ after
adjustment for other measures of socioeconomic status. The
Green/Red model of this section offers an explanation for the
significance of such dummy variables. Furthermore, it yields a
less monolithic view of poverty than current economic theories
that emphasize conformity (e.g., Akerlof [1997] and Brock and
Durlauf [1995]).
A. Motivation for Model
Our model reflects the many ethnographic accounts of ‘‘oppo-
sitional’’ identities in poor neighborhoods. MacLeod’s [1987] study
of teenagers in a Boston area housing project, for example,
contrasts the murderous and alcoholic Hallway Hangers to their
obedient and athletic peers, the Brothers. In Learning to Labour
Willis [1977] describes the antagonism between the unruly ‘‘lads’’
and the dutiful ‘‘earholes’’ in a working-class English secondary
school. Similarly, Whyte’s [1943] description of Boston’s Italian
North End circa 1940 contrasts the Corner Boys to the College
Boys. Yet earlier, turn-of-the century accounts of the Irish in the
United States contrast the ‘‘lace curtain’’ Irish of poor districts to
their neighbors (see, e.g., Miller [1985]).
Our model further evokes the psychological effects of social
exclusion in the colonial experience analyzed by Bhabha [1983]
and Fanon [1967], and in the context of African-Americans in the
United States by Anderson [1990], Baldwin [1962], Clark [1965],
DuBois [1965], Frazier [1957], Hannerz [1969], Rainwater [1970],
Wilson [1987, 1996], and others. In these settings, individuals
from particular groups can never fully fit the ideal type, the ideal
‘‘Green,’’ of the dominant culture. Some in excluded groups may
try to ‘‘pass’’ or integrate with the dominant group, but they do so
with ambivalence and limited success.53 A series of autobiogra-
phies tells of the pain and anger of discovering that one is not
really ‘‘Green.’’ Former New York Times editor Mel Watkins [1998]
titles the chapter on his freshman year at Colgate as ‘‘stranger in
a strange land.’’ Gandhi [1966], Fanon [1967], Fulwood [1996],
Staples [1994], and Rodriguez [1982] all relate strikingly similar
experiences of perceived or real rejection and alienation. This
social exclusion may create a conflict: how to work within the
dominant culture without betraying oneself. As Jill Nelson [1993,
53. Indeed, the word passing itself is pejorative and evokes a penumbra of
reactions to being other than one’s ‘‘true’’ self.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 739
p. 10] explains her exhaustion after a long day of interviewing for
a job at The Washington Post:
I’ve also been doing the standard Negro balancing act when it comes to
dealing with white folks, which involves sufficiently blurring the edges of my
being so that they don’t feel intimidated, while simultaneously holding on to
my integrity. There is a thin line between Uncle-Tomming and Mau-Mauing.
To fall off that line can mean disaster. On one side lies employment and
self-hatred; on the other, the equally dubious honor of unemployment with
integrity.
These reactions, it must be emphasized, reflect how dominant
groups define themselves by the exclusion of others. The creation
and evolution of such social differences are the subject of much
historical research. Said [1978] documents the emergence of the
Western idea of the ‘‘Oriental,’’ a concept that had significant
implications for colonialism. In the United States Roediger [1991]
and other historians show how workers of European descent in
the nineteenth century increasingly were defined as ‘‘white.’’ Prior
to Emancipation, this identity evoked the contrast between white
freedom and African-American enslavement. In the model we
construct, the key interaction is between such social differences
and the adoption of oppositional identities by those in excluded
groups.
Lack of economic opportunity may also contribute to the
choice of an oppositional identity. Wilson [1987, 1996] underscores
the relation between the decline in remunerative unskilled jobs,
the loss of self-respect by men who cannot support their families,
and the rise in inner city crime and drug abuse. This process is
illustrated in microcosm by ‘‘Richard’’ in Tally’s Corner [Liebow
1967]. Unable to find decent-paying work, he abandoned his
family and joined Tally’s group of idlers on the street corner. By
adopting a different identity, Richard no longer suffered the guilt
of a failed provider.54
Red activities have negative pecuniary externalities. Rich-
ard’s wife and children had to find alternative means of support.
The prime goal of the ‘‘lads’’ in Willis’ secondary school was to get a
‘‘laff,’’ through vandalism, picking fights, and returning drunk to
school from the local pub. Running a school with lads is difficult.
The situation corresponds to the externalities in Be´nabou’s [1993,
1996] models of high schooling costs in poor neighborhoods.
54. See Montgomery [1994] for an interpretation of Richard’s behavior in
terms of cognitive dissonance.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
740
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Further externalities accrue from drug dealing, crime, and other
‘‘pathological’’ behavior.
In our model, there are also identity-based externalities. A
Red is angered by a Green’s complicity with the dominant culture,
while a Green is angered by a Red’s ‘‘breaking the rules.’’ Again
consider Willis’ lads and earholes. As the lads define themselves in
contrast to the earholes, the earholes define themselves in con-
trast to the lads. The earholes are even more proestablishment
than the teachers—feeling that the teachers should be stricter.
The lads, in turn, bait the earholes. This situation is just one
(relatively tame) example of how interaction between the two
groups generates antagonism on both sides.
B. Identity Model of Poverty and Social Exclusion
As in the prototype model, there are two activities, One and
Two. Activity One can be thought of as ‘‘working’’ and Activity Two
as ‘‘not working.’’ There is a large community, normalized to size
one, of individuals. The economic return to Activity One for
individual i is vi which we assume is uniformly distributed
between zero and one, to reflect heterogeneity in the population
and to ensure interior solutions. The economic return to Activity
Two is normalized to zero.
As for identity, there are two social categories, Green and
Red. A Green suffers a loss in identity r, representing the extent to
which someone from this community is not accepted by the
dominant group in society. Those with the less adaptive Red
identity do not suffer this loss. Behavioral prescriptions say that
Greens (Reds) should engage in Activity One (Two). Thus, a Green
(Red) loses identity from Activity Two (One) in amount Is
G(Is
R).55
Because Reds reject the dominant Green culture, they are also
likely to have lower economic returns to Activity One than
Greens.56 A Red individual i will only earn vi a from Activity
One, as well as suffer the loss Is
R. There are also identity
externalities when Greens and Reds meet. A Green (Red) suffers a
loss Io
G(Io
R). In addition, Reds who have chosen Activity Two
55. We discuss below the possibility of a Red identity where individuals can
both reject the dominant culture and at the same time do not lose Is
R from Activity
One.
56. Wilson [1996, Chapter 5] documents the difficulties that employers
perceive in hiring employees from the inner city. From the vantage point of our
model, it does not matter whether the perceived problems, parameterized by a,
reflect real differences in productivity or those that are merely imagined because of
the mismatch of the employers’ and the employees’ attitudes.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 741
impose a pecuniary externality k on those who have chosen
Activity One.
Each person i chooses an identity and activity, given the
choices of everyone else in the community. We assume that people
cannot modify their identity or activity for each individual
encounter. Rather, individuals choose an identity and activity to
maximize expected payoffs, given the probabilities of encounters
with Greens who choose Activity One, Greens who choose Two,
Reds who choose One, and Reds who choose Two.
C. Equilibria and Interpretation
Equilibria of this model show how social interaction within
the community and social exclusion from the dominant group
determine the prevalence of Red identities and Activity Two
behavior.57 An All-Green Equilibrium (everyone is Green and
engages in Activity One) exists, if and only if the loss in Green
identity, r, from exclusion from the dominant group is smaller
than the difficulty of being Red in a community of Greens, Io
R.
Figure II shows this condition in the area above the 45° line from
the origin. For higher levels of r, equilibria must involve some in
the community adopting a Red identity. The nonexistence of the
All-Green equilibrium reveals a difference in the predictions of
this model and previous models of behavior in poor neighbor-
hoods. Here, social exclusion (r 0) will lead some people in the
community to adopt an oppositional identity and Activity Two
behavior, even in the absence of conformity-generating externali-
ties (i.e., Io
R Io
G k 0).
In a Mixed Equilibrium of our model, some in the community
choose Activity One and a Green identity, but others choose
Activity Two and Red identities. This equilibrium arises for
intermediate levels of r (in the area between the two upward-
sloping lines in Figure II).
The equilibrium adoption of Red identities and Activity Two
behavior captures the self-destructive behavior of the underclass
central to sociological study, but contrary to standard economic
thinking. Rainwater [1970, p. 3] summarized his classic study of
ghetto poverty: ‘‘white cupidity creates structural conditions
highly inimical to basic social adaptation to which Negroes adapt
57. Full analysis of the model is available from the authors upon request. In
the analysis we make the simplifying assumption that Is
G k so that any-
one who chooses a Green identity will choose Activity One. We also assume
that all parameters are strictly positive and less than unity and that Is
R a k 1.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
742
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
FIGURE II
Equilibria in Model of Poverty and Social Exclusion
This figure shows ranges of parameter values for three different equilibria:
All-Green where everyone is Green and chooses Activity One; Mixed where
Greens choose Activity One and Reds choose Activity Two; All-Red where
everyone is Red and some choose Activity One and others choose Activity Two.
by social and personal responses which serve to sustain the
individual in his punishing world but also to generate aggressive-
ness toward the self and others which results in suffering directly
inflicted by Negroes on themselves and on others.’’ While Activity
One is maximizing to someone with a Green identity, it is not
maximizing to someone with a Red identity. The ‘‘self-destructive’’
Red behavior is not the result of individual ‘‘irrationality,’’ but
instead derives from low economic endowments and a high degree
of social exclusion.
Comparative statics of the mixed equilibrium captures Wil-
son’s [1987, 1996] analysis of ghetto poverty. An out-migration of
the middle class (those with high returns vi in the model) will
result in further adoption of Red identities among the remaining
population. Also, when work disappears, there will be a downward
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 743
shift in distribution of payoffs from Activity One. This shift will
also increase the incidence of Activity Two and Red identities.
In an All-Red Equilibrium, some individuals choose Activity
One and conform with the dominant group in terms of economic
behavior, but all choose an oppositional Red identity. This equilib-
rium arises when a high loss from being Green in an all-Red
community, Io
G, complements high levels of social exclusion, r (in
the area to the right of the vertical line in Figure II).58 This
equilibrium is also achieved with a low value of Is
R and, thus,
provides an interpretation of social movements that may arise
from exclusion. Some separatist leaders, such as Malcolm X and
Louis Farrakhan, have advanced an oppositional Red identity but
at the same time have tried to change associated prescriptions,
resulting in a lower Is
R. In these movements, Activity One does not
imply complicity with the dominant group. Rather, self-restraint,
education, and employment are a means for individual advance-
ment and community liberation.
D. Further Lessons from the Model
The model and its solution also afford interpretations of
policies designed to reduce poverty and the effects of social
exclusion.
First, the model indicates why residential Job Corps pro-
grams may succeed while other training programs fail [Stanley,
Katz, and Krueger 1998]. According to the model, taking trainees
out of their neighborhoods would eliminate, at least for a time, the
negative effects of interaction with those with Red identities.
Moreover, being in a different location may reduce a trainee’s
direct loss r from being Green and pursuing Activity One. That is,
this loss may be both individual-specific and situational, and
leaving a poor neighborhood is likely to generate a lower r than
otherwise. In a somewhat controlled experiment, the U. S. govern-
ment tried to save money with JOBSTART, which preserved many
of the features of Job Corps except the expensive housing of
trainees. Follow-up studies of JOBSTART show little or no
improvement in employment or earnings.59
58. It overlaps the regions of other equilibria because this condition is
independent of Io
R, unlike those for the above equilibria where a Red would suffer
the loss from interacting with Greens.
59. The Center for Employment and Training in San Jose was the one
remarkable exception.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
744
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Second, the model affords an interpretation of different
education initiatives for minority students. Like Job Corps, the
Central Park East Secondary School (CPESS) in East Harlem
may succeed because it separates Green students from Red
students. Students, for example, must apply to the school, indicat-
ing their and their parents’ willingness to adopt its rules (see
Fliegel [1993] and Meier [1995] for this and other details).
Another interpretation of CPESS and other successes (e.g., Comer
[1980] in New Haven) parallels the logic of the all-Red equilibrium
where some people nonetheless pursue Activity One. The schools
take measures to reduce the loss in identity of Red students, Is
R, in
activities such as learning Standard English.60 Delpit’s [1995]
award-winning book Other People’s Children proposes numerous
ways to reduce the alienation that minority students may experi-
ence in school.
Finally, the model illuminates a set of issues in the affirma-
tive action debate. Much of this debate concerns the success or
failure of specific programs (see, e.g., Dickens and Kane [1996]).
Yet, more is at stake. The rhetoric and symbolism of affirmative
action may affect the level of social exclusion r. On the one hand,
Loury [1995] argues that portraying African-Americans as vic-
tims, a portrayal necessary to retain affirmative action programs,
is costly to blacks. In terms of the model, such rhetoric will
increase r and the adoption of Red identities. On the other hand,
affirmative action will decrease r, to the extent it is seen as an
apology for previous discrimination and an invitation for black
admission to the dominant culture. Reversal of affirmative action
would negate this effect. To cite a recent example, our analysis
suggests that removing affirmative action admissions criteria at
the University of California and University of Texas Law Schools
could have behavioral implications that far exceed the impact on
applicants.
The identity model of exclusion, then, explains why legal
equality may not be enough to eliminate racial disparities.61 If
60. Ogbu [1997] and Delpit [1995] find that African-American students in
poor neighborhoods may be ambivalent about learning Standard English, whose
use may be construed as ‘‘acting white.’’
61. We see this distinction in the different conclusions of two recent studies of
U. S. race relations. Thernstrom and Thernstrom [1997] urge an end to affirmative
action, making the case that attitudes of whites toward blacks as well as the legal
opportunities for blacks have changed since The American Dilemma [Myrdal
1944]. In contrast, Shipler [1997] points out the many ways in which African-
Americans and whites feel uncomfortable with each other and how blacks are still
seen as different and not fully accepted.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 745
African-Americans choose to be Red because of exclusion and if
whites perpetuate such exclusions, even in legal ways, there can
be a permanent equilibrium of racial inequality. The negative
externalities and their consequences, however, would disappear
when the community is fully integrated into the dominant cul-
ture, so that r a 0, and everyone in the community adopts a
Green identity. This, of course, is the American ideal of the
melting pot, or the new ideal of a mosaic where difference can be
maintained within the dominant culture.
VI. IDENTITY AND THE ECONOMICS OF THE HOUSEHOLD
An identity model of the household, unlike previous models,
predicts an asymmetric division of labor between husbands and
wives. Theories based on comparative advantage (e.g., Becker
[1965] and Mincer [1962]) predict that whoever works more
outside the home will work less inside the home, whether it be the
husband or the wife. Yet, the data we present below indicate a
gender asymmetry. When a wife works more hours outside the
home, she still undertakes a larger share of the housework.
Hochschild’s [1990] study The Second Shift reveals the de-
tails of such asymmetries. One of the couples in her study found
an ingenious way to share the housework. ‘‘Evan Holt,’’ a furni-
ture salesman, took care of the lower half of the house (i.e., the
basement and his tools). His wife ‘‘Nancy,’’ a full-time licensed
social worker, took care of the upper half. She took care of the
child. He took care of the dog.
Quantitative evidence from Hochschild’s sample and our data
analysis suggest that the Holts conform to a national pattern.
Figure III shows the low average of husbands’ share of housework
and its low elasticity with respect to their share of outside work
hours. The figure plots shares of housework reported by married
men62 in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,63 as computed from
62. Men’s reports of housework shares matched almost exactly women’s
reports in Preston’s [1997] study of 1700 scientists.
63. The unit of observation is a couple-year for the years 1983 to 1992.
Couples were included in a given year, if they were married, neither member was
retired, neither member was disabled, the couple had positive work hours, positive
earnings, and positive hours of housework. In addition, they were only included if
there were complete data from both members on earnings, work hours, housework
hours, and number of children. The final sample had slightly more than 29,000
couple-years of observations. We define a husband’s share of housework, hswk, as
his share of the total performed by the couple. Thus, we capture the division of
labor even in households that hire outside workers. We estimate the following
Tobit equation: hswk a i 1,2,3[b1ihi b2ihi
2 b3ihi
3 b4ihi
4] error, where hi
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
746
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
FIGURE III
Husbands’ Share of Housework Hours versus Their Share of Outside Work Hours
answers to the question(s): ‘‘About how much time do you (your
wife) spend on housework in an average week? I mean time spent
cooking, cleaning, and doing other work around the house?’’ The
intent of the question was to exclude child care. The figure plots
men’s share of housework as a fourth-order polynomial of their
share of outside hours, for households by age of youngest child.
When men do all the outside work, they contribute on average
about 10 percent of housework. But as their share of outside work
falls, their share of housework rises to no more than 37 percent. As
shown in the figure the presence of children of different ages
is the husband’s share of outside hours worked if in group i. The summation (i
1,2,3) runs over three types of household: with no children or youngest child over
age 13, with youngest child 0 to 5, and with youngest child 6 to 13. Controls were
included for age of husband, and wife relative to population average, log of total
income, and also total hours of housework. Results were robust to different
specifications and estimators, and substitution of share of earnings for share of
hours worked. The equations and confidence intervals are available upon request.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 747
makes a small difference to the function.64 Similar results obtain
when the independent variable is shares of income rather than
shares of outside work hours.
Existing theories do not predict this asymmetry. Consider the
following variant based on comparative advantage. Husband and
wife both have the same utility function, which is increasing in
quantity of a household public good that derives from their joint
labor.65 Utility is decreasing in own labor inputs in outside and
home production.66 We assume equal bargaining power, so that
each marriage partner enjoys the same level of utility.67 With this
framework, returns to specialization explain the observed divi-
sion of labor when a wife has a comparative advantage in home
production. Women who put in less than half of the outside work
hours put in more than half the housework, as seen in the
right-hand side of the graph of Figure III. But this model is
inconsistent with the left-hand side of the graph.
Identity considerations can explain the high shares of house-
work of wives who undertake a large share of outside work hours.
Add to the above model two social categories, ‘‘men’’ and ‘‘women.’’
Prescriptions dictate that ‘‘men’’ should not do ‘‘women’s work’’ in
the home and ‘‘men’’ should earn more than their wives. Hochs-
child’s interviews suggest that many men, and some women, hold
these prescriptions. In the amended model, the husband loses
identity when he does housework and when his wife earns more
than half the household income. Equality of utility is restored
when the wife undertakes more housework than her husband.
Hochschild reports that in the ‘‘Tanagawa’’ household, for ex-
ample, ‘‘Nina’’ earned more than half the family income, but she
64. Hersch and Stratton [1994] use the PSID to study whether husbands’
higher wage incomes account for their lower shares of housework. The estimation
here, in contrast, evaluates the asymmetry in the relationship between husbands’
share of income and their shares of housework, and wives’ shares of income and
housework.
65. The public goods aspect of a marriage follows Lundberg and Pollak [1993],
where the contributions of each spouse are in ‘‘separate spheres’’ that reflect
gender roles. The first bargaining models of the household are due to Manser and
Brown [1980] and McElroy and Horney [1981].
66. Utility of the wife is Uf Uf ( g,hf
h,hf
o), where g is the household public
good, produced by both home and outside labor, hf
h is the wife’s hours of house-
work, and hf
o is her outside work. The husband’s utility function is, similarly,
Um Um( g,hm
h ,hm
o ), where Uf and Um are assumed to be the same functions.
67. We assume that a household maximizes the sum of utilities subject to the
condition Uf Um. When bargaining power derives from earning capabilities and
control of financial resources, as assumed by Hersch and Stratton [1994] and
others, it only reinforces the conclusion that whoever works more outside the home
works less inside.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
748
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
worked more than ‘‘Peter’’ at home to assuage his unease with the
situation. Eventually, she quit her job.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper considers how identity affects economic outcomes.
Following major themes in psychology and sociology, identity in
our models is based on social difference. A person’s sense of self is
associated with different social categories and how people in these
categories should behave. This simple extension of the utility
function could greatly expand our understanding of economic
outcomes. In a world of social difference, one of the most impor-
tant economic decisions that an individual makes may be the type
of person to be. Limits on this choice would also be critical
determinants of economic behavior, opportunity, and well-being.
Identity affects economic behavior in our models through four
avenues. First, identity changes the payoffs from one’s own
actions. We capture this possibility by a value Is in our models. In
our study of gender in the workplace, for example, a woman
working in a ‘‘man’s’’ job suffers a loss in utility, affecting the labor
supply. Second, identity changes the payoffs of others’ actions. We
capture this externality by a value Io in our models. A ‘‘Red’’ in our
poverty model, for example, is harmed by a member of his own
community who complies with the dominant culture. Third, the
choice, or lack thereof, of different identities affects an individual’s
economic behavior. In our poverty model, while individuals could
choose between Green or Red, they could never be a ‘‘true’’ Green.
The greater the extent of this social exclusion, the greater the
possibility of equilibria in which individuals eschew remunerative
activities. Finally, the social categories and behavioral prescrip-
tions can be changed, affecting identity-based preferences. This
possibility expanded the scope of employment policy in our model
of gender in the workplace and of education policy in our study of
social exclusion.
This paper has only scratched the surface of the economic
implications of identity. A first tack in future research would be
continued analysis of particular settings. Identity is likely to
affect economic outcomes, for example, in areas of political
economy, organizational behavior, demography, the economics of
language, violence, education, consumption and savings behavior,
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 749
retirement decisions, and labor relations.68 As in this paper,
models that incorporate well-documented existing social catego-
ries and prescriptions could yield new results. A second tack in
this agenda is comparative, examining identity across space and
time.69 Researchers, for example, could consider why notions of
‘‘class’’ or ‘‘race’’ vary across countries; why might gender and
racial integration vary across industries; what might explain the
rise and fall of ethnic tensions. Such comparative studies would
be a fruitful way to explore the formation of identity-based
preferences.70
In peroration, this paper explores how to incorporate identity
into economic models of behavior. Many standard psychological
and sociological concepts—self-image, ideal type, in-group and
out-group, social category, identification, anxiety, self-destruction,
self-realization, situation—fit naturally in our framework, allow-
ing an expanded analysis of economic outcomes. This framework
is then perhaps one way to incorporate many different nonpecuni-
ary motivations for behavior into economic reasoning, with consid-
erable generality and a common theme.
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT BERKELEY AND THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND AT COLLEGE PARK
REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A., ‘‘The Economics of Caste and of the Rat Race and Other Woeful
Tales,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, XC (November, 1976), 599–617.
, ‘‘Social Distance and Social Decisions,’’ Econometrica, LXV (September
1997), 1005–1027.
Altenbaugh, Richard J., The Teacher’s Voice: A Social History of Teaching in
Twentieth-Century America (London: The Falmer Press, 1992).
Anderson, Elijah, StreetWise: Race, Class, and Change in an Urban Community
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
Andreoni, James, ‘‘Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and
Ricardian Equivalence,’’ Journal of Political Economy, XCVII (December
1989), 1447–1458.
68. See a previous version of the paper for short versions of many of these
applications.
69. We are grateful to an anonymous referee for this list of comparative
studies.
70. Some scholars have studied the formation of identity-based preferences
from principles of optimization. Theories of evolutionary psychology, for example,
posit that hostility toward ‘‘outsiders’’ might be inherent to human nature as a
result of an evolutionary process; survival depends on cooperation with insiders
and hostility toward outsiders. Another functional explanation of identity derives
from social cognition theory: stereotypes summarize information and compensate
for human beings’ limited cognitive abilities. (See Wetherell [1998, pp. 186–197]
for review.) These theories, however, may find it difficult to accommodate the
complexity of social categories and prescriptions and the variety of social catego-
ries across societies and across time.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
750
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Arrow, Kenneth J., ‘‘Models of Job Discrimination’’ and ‘‘Some Mathematical
Models of Race Discrimination in the Labor Market,’’ in Anthony H. Pascal,
ed., Racial Discrimination in Economic Life (Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath,
1972).
Baldwin, James, The Fire Next Time (New York: The Dial Press, 1962).
Becker, Gary S., ‘‘A Theory of the Allocation of Time,’’ Economic Journal, LXXV
(September 1965), 493–517.
, The Economics of Discrimination, second edition (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1971).
Be´nabou, Roland, ‘‘Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production,’’
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVIII (August 1993), 619–652.
, ‘‘Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic Implications of
Community Structure and School Finance,’’ American Economic Review,
LXXXVI (June 1996), 584–609.
Bergmann, Barbara R., ‘‘Occupational Segregation, Wages and Profits When
Employers Discriminate by Race or Sex,’’ Eastern Economics Journal, I (1974),
103–110.
Bhabha, Homi, ‘‘Difference, Discrimination, and the Discourse of Colonialism,’’ in
The Politics of Theory, F. Barker, ed. (London: Colchester, 1983).
Blau, Francine D., and Marianne A. Ferber, The Economics of Women, Men, and
Work (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1986).
Blau, Francine D., Patricia Simpson, and DeborahAnderson, ‘‘Continuing Progress?
Trends in Occupational Segregation in the United States over the 1970’s and
1980’s,’’ NBER Working Paper No. 6716, 1998.
Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis, ‘‘Optimal Parochialism: The Dynamics of
Trust and Exclusion in Communities,’’ mimeo, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, 1997.
Breger, Louis, From Instinct to Identity: The Development of Personality (Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1974).
Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf, ‘‘Discrete Choice with Social Interac-
tions I: Theory,’’ NBER Working Paper No. 5291, 1995.
Brown, Roger W., Social Psychology: The Second Edition (New York: The Free
Press, 1986).
Bryk, Anthony S., Valerie E. Lee, and Peter B. Holland, Catholic Schools and the
Common Good (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993).
Bulow, Jeremy I., and Lawrence H. Summers, ‘‘A Theory of Dual Labor Markets
withApplication to Industrial Policy, Discrimination and Keynesian Unemploy-
ment,’’ Journal of Labor Economics, IV (July 1986), 376–415.
Bumiller, Elisabeth, May You Be the Mother of a Hundred Sons: A Journey Among
the Women of India (New York: Random House, 1990).
Butterfield, Fox, All God’s Children: The Bosket Family and the American
Tradition of Violence (New York: Avon Books, 1995).
Clark, Kenneth, Dark Ghetto (New York: Harper & Row, 1965).
Cole, Harold L., George J. Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite, ‘‘Social Norms,
Savings Behavior and Growth,’’ Journal of Political Economy, C (December
1992), 1092–1125.
Comer, James P., School Power: Implications of an Intervention Project (New York:
The Free Press, 1980).
Davies, Margery, Women’s Place Is at the Typewriter: Office Work and Office
Workers, 1870–1930 (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1982).
Davis, Fred, The Nursing Profession: Five Sociological Essays (New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1966).
de Grazia, Victoria, The Sex of Things: Gender and Consumption in Historical
Perspective (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996).
Delpit, Lisa, Other People’s Children: Cultural Conflict in the Classroom (New
York: The New Press, 1995).
Dickens, William T., and Thomas J. Kane, ‘‘Racial and Ethnic Preference in
College Admissions,’’ Brookings Policy Brief No. 9 (Washington, DC: The
Brookings Institution, November 1996).
DuBois, William E., The Souls of Black Folk (Greenwich, CT: Fawcett Publica-
tions, 1965).
Elster, Jon, The Cement of Society: A Study of Social Order (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1989).
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 751
Fanon, Frantz, Black Skin, White Masks (New York: Grove Press, 1967).
Fisher, Sue, Nursing Wounds: Nurse Practitioners/Doctors/Women Patients/And
the Negotiation of Meaning (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press,
1995).
Fliegel, Seymour, Miracle in East Harlem: The Fight for Choice in Public
Education (New York: Random House, 1993).
Folbre, Nancy, Who Pays for the Kids: Gender and the Structures of Constraint
(New York: Routledge, 1994).
Franke, Katherine M., ‘‘The Central Mistake of Sex Discrimination Law: The
Disaggregation of Sex from Gender,’’ University of Pennsylvania Law Review,
CXLIV (November 1995), 1–99.
Frazier, Franklin, The Black Bourgeoisie: The Rise of the New Middle Class in the
United States (New York: The Free Press, 1957).
Friedman, Milton, Essays in Positive Economics (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1953).
Fulwood III, Sam, Waking from the Dream: My Life in the Black Middle Class (New
York: Doubleday, 1996).
Gandhi, Mohandas, Autobiography (London: Jonathon Cape, 1966).
Gerson, Kathleen, Hard Choices: How Women Decide about Work, Career, and
Motherhood (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1986).
Gleitman, Henry, Basic Psychology (New York: Norton, 1996).
Goldin, Claudia, Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of Ameri-
can Women (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990a).
, ‘‘A Pollution Theory of Discrimination,’’ mimeo, Harvard University, 1990b.
Goodson, Ivor F., and Andy Hargreaves, Teachers’ Professional Lives (London: The
Falmer Press, 1996).
Hannerz, Ulf, Soulside: Inquiries into Ghetto Culture and Community (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1969).
Hersch, Joni, and Leslie S. Stratton, ‘‘Housework, Wages, and the Division of
Housework Time for Employed Spouses,’’ American Economic Association
Papers and Proceedings, LXXXIV (May 1994), 120–125.
Hochschild, Arlie, with Anne Machung, The Second Shift (New York: Avon, 1990).
Honey, Maureen, Creating Rosie the Riveter: Class, Gender, and Propaganda
during World War II (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1984).
Huang, Peter H., and Ho Mou Wu, ‘‘More Order without Law: A Theory of Social
Norms and Organizational Cultures,’’ Journal of Law, Economics, & Organi-
zation, X (October 1994), 390–406.
Kandori, Michihiro, ‘‘Social Norms and Community Enforcement,’’ Review of
Economic Studies, LXIX (January 1992), 63–80.
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, Men and Women of the Corporation (New York: Basic
Books, 1977).
Kevane, Michael, ‘‘Can There Be an ‘Identity Economics’?’’ mimeo, Harvard
Academy for International and Area Studies, 1994.
Khatibi, Abdelkebir, La Blessure du Nom Propre (Paris: Denoe ¨l, 1986).
Khattab, Hind, ‘‘Women’s Perceptions of Sexuality in Rural Giza,’’ Reproductive
Health Working Group, The Population Council, Monographs in Reproductive
Health No. 1, 1996.
Kuran, Timur, ‘‘Ethnic Norms and Their Transformation through Reputation
Cascades,’’ Journal of Legal Studies, XXVII (Summer 1998, Part 2), 623–659.
Landa, Janet T., Trust, Ethnicity, and Identity: Beyond the New Institutional
Economics of Trading Networks (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,
1994).
Lazear, Edward P., and Sherwin Rosen, ‘‘Male-Female Wage Differentials in Job
Ladders,’’ Journal of Labor Economics, VIII (January 1990), S106–S123.
Levine, Judith A., ‘‘It’s a Man’s Job, or So They Say: The Production of Sex
Segregation in Occupations,’’ mimeo, Department of Sociology, Northwestern
University, 1995.
Liebow, Elliott, Tally’s Corner: A Study of Negro Streetcorner Men (Boston:
Little-Brown, 1967).
Loewenstein, George, ‘‘Because It Is There: The Challenge of Mountaineering . . .
for Utility Theory,’’ mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University, 1998.
Loury, Glenn C., One by One from the Inside Out (New York: The Free Press, 1995).
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
752
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Lundberg, Shelly, and Robert A. Pollak, ‘‘Separate Spheres Bargaining and the
Marriage Market,’’ Journal of Political Economy, CI (December 1993), 988–
1010.
MacKinnon, Catharine A., Sexual Harassment of Working Women (New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 1979).
MacLeod, Jay, Ain’t No Makin’ It: Leveled Aspirations in a Low-Income Neighbor-
hood (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1987).
Manser, Marilyn, and Murray Brown, ‘‘Marriage and Household Decision Making:
A Bargaining Analysis,’’ International Economic Review, XXI (February 1980),
31–44.
Mason, Karen Oppenheim, ‘‘Commentary: Strober’s Theory of Occupational Sex
Segregation,’’ Chapter 9 in Barbara Reskin, ed., Sex Segregation in the
Workplace (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1984).
McElroy, Marjorie B., and Mary Jean Horney, ‘‘Nash Bargained Household
Decisions,’’ International Economic Review, XXII (June 1981), 559–583.
Meier, Deborah, The Power of Their Ideas: Lessons for America from a Small
School in Harlem (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1995).
Milkman, Ruth, Gender at Work: The Dynamics of Job Segregation by Sex during
World War II (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1987).
Miller, Kerby A., ‘‘Assimilation and Alienation: Irish Emigrants’ Responses to
Industrial America,’’ in P. J. Drudy, ed., The Irish in America: Emigration,
Assimilation and Impact (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1985).
Mincer, Jacob, and Solomon Polachek, ‘‘Family Investments in Human Capital:
Earnings of Women,’’ Journal of Political Economy, LXXXII (March 1974),
S76–S108.
Mincer, Jacob, ‘‘Labor Force Participation of Married Women: A Study of Labor
Supply,’’ in Aspects of Labor Economics, Conference No. 14 of the Universities-
National Bureau Committee for Economic Research (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1962).
Montgomery, James D., ‘‘Revisiting Tally’s Corner: Mainstream Norms, Cognitive
Dissonance and Underclass Behavior,’’ Rationality and Society, VI (1994),
462–488.
, ‘‘Towards a Role-Theoretic Conception of Embeddedness,’’ mimeo, London
School of Economics, 1997.
Mottus, Jane E., New York Nightingales: The Emergence of the Nursing Profession
at Bellevue and New York Hospital 1850–1920 (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1981).
Myrdal, Gunnar, An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and American
Democracy (New York: Harper and Row, 1944).
Nelson, Jill, Volunteer Slavery: An Authentic Negro Experience (New York:
Penguin, 1993).
Nisbett, Richard E., and Dov Cohen, Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence
in the South (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996).
Norton, Anne, Reflections on Political Identity (Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1988).
Ogbu, John U., ‘‘Beyond Language: Ebonics, Proper English and Identity in a
Black American Speech Community,’’ mimeo, University of California at
Berkeley, Department of Anthropology, 1997.
Okuno-Fujiwara, M., and Andrew Postlewaite, ‘‘Social Norms and Random
Matching Games,’’ Games and Economic Behavior, IX (April 1995), 79–109.
Padavic, Irene, ‘‘The Re-Creation of Gender in a Male Workplace,’’ Symbolic
Interaction, XIV (1991), 279–294.
Pierce, Jennifer, Gender Trials: Emotional Lives in Contemporary Law Firms
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995).
Pierson, Ruth Roach, They’re Still Women After All: The Second World War and
Canadian Womanhood (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1989).
Preston, Anne, ‘‘Sex, Kids, and Commitment to the Workplace: Employers,
Employees, and the Mommy Track,’’ Russell Sage Foundation Working Paper
No. 123, 1997.
Pringle, Rosemary, Secretaries Talk: Sexuality, Power and Work (New York: Verso,
1988).
Rabin, Matthew, ‘‘Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics,’’
American Economic Review, LXXXIII (December 1993), 1281–1302.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ECONOMICS AND IDENTITY 753
Rainwater, Lee, Behind Ghetto Walls: Black Families in a Federal Slum (Chicago,
IL: Aldine, 1970).
Reskin, Barbara, and Patricia Roos, eds., Job Queues, Gender Queues: Explaining
Women’s Inroads Into Male Occupations (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University
Press, 1990).
Rodriguez, Richard, Hunger of Memory: The Education of Richard Rodriguez (New
York: Bantam, 1982).
Roediger, David R., The Wages of Whiteness (New York: Verso Press, 1991).
Romer, Paul M., ‘‘Preferences, Promises, and the Politics of Enlightenment,’’
mimeo, University of California at Berkeley, December, 1994.
Sachs, Susan, ‘‘Muslim Schools in U. S. a Voice for Identity,’’ The New York Times,
November 10, 1998, A1.
Said, Edward W., Orientalism (New York: Random House, 1978).
Sanday, Peggy Reeves, Fraternity Gang Rape: Sex, Brotherhood, and Privilege on
Campus (New York: New York University Press, 1990).
Schultz, Vicki, ‘‘Reconceptualizing Sexual Harassment,’’ Yale Law Journal, CVII
(April 1998), 1683–1805.
Sen, Amartya K., ‘‘The Impossibility of a Paretian Liberal,’’ Journal of Political
Economy, LXXVIII (January 1970), 152–157.
, ‘‘Goals, Commitment, and Identity,’’ Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, I (Fall 1985), 341–355.
, ‘‘Maximization and the Act of Choice,’’ Econometrica, LXV (July 1997),
745–779.
Shipler, David, A Country of Strangers: Blacks and Whites in America (New York:
Knopf, 1997).
Stanley, Marcus, Lawrence Katz, and Alan Krueger, ‘‘Impacts of Employment
Programs: The American Experience,’’ mimeo, Harvard University, 1998.
Staples, Brent, Parallel Time: Growing Up in Black and White (New York:
Pantheon, 1994).
Stinnett, T. M., Professional Problems of Teachers (New York: Macmillan, 1968).
Strober, Myra, ‘‘Toward a General Theory of Occupational Sex Segregation: The
Case of Public School Teaching,’’ Chapter 8 in Barbara Reskin, ed., Sex
Segregation in the Workplace (Washington: National Academy Press, 1984).
Sugg, Redding S., Motherteacher: The Feminization of American Education
(Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1978).
Suskind, Ron, A Hope in the Unseen (New York: Broadway, 1998).
Tajfel, Henri, and John Turner, ‘‘An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conflict,’’ in
The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, William G. Austin and Stephen
Worchel, eds. (Monterey, CA: Wadsworth, 1979).
Thernstrom, Stephan, and Abigail Thernstrom, America in Black and White: One
Nation, Indivisible (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997).
Thomas, Kerry, ‘‘The Defensive Self:APsychodynamic Perspective,’’in Understand-
ing the Self, Richard Stevens, ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications,
1996).
Turow, Scott, One L (New York: Warner Books, 1977).
Watkins, Mel, Dancing With Strangers: A Memoir (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1998).
Wetherell, Margaret, ‘‘Group Conflict and the Social Psychology of Racism,’’ in
Group Conflict and the Psychology of Racism, Margaret Wetherell, ed.
(Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 1996).
Whyte, William Foote, Street Corner Society: The Social Structure of an Italian
Slum (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1943).
Williams, Christine, Gender Differences at Work: Women and Men in Nontradi-
tional Occupations (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989).
Willis, Paul R., Learning to Labour: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class
Jobs (Westmead, Farnborough, Hants., UK: Saxon House, 1977).
Wilson, William J., The Truly Disadvantaged (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 1987).
, When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor (New York: Knopf,
1996).
Wurzburg, Lynne A., and Robert H. Klonoff, in Hope Landrine and Elizabeth A.
Klonoff, eds. Discrimination Against Women: Prevalence, Consequences, Rem-
edies, (Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 1997), pp. 175–195.
at Wofford College, Sandor Teszler Library on August 30, 2013 http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
