 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606 
 
Behavioral Economics: Past, Present, and Future† 
BY	  RICHARD	  H.	  THALER*	  
May, 2016 
Abstract:	  There	  has	  been	  growing	  interest	  in	  the	  field	  come	  to	  me	  known	  as	  
“behavioral	  economics”	  which	  attempts	  to	  incorporate	  insights	  from	  other	  social	  
sciences,	  especially	  psychology,	  in	  order	  to	  enrich	  the	  standard	  economic	  model.	  	  
This	  interest	  the	  underlying	  psychology	  of	  human	  behavior	  returns	  economics	  to	  its	  
earliest	  roots.	  	  Scholars	  such	  as	  Adam	  Smith	  talked	  about	  such	  key	  concepts	  as	  loss	  
aversion,	  overconfidence,	  and	  self-­‐control.	  	  Nevertheless,	  the	  modern	  version	  of	  
behavioral	  economics	  introduced	  in	  the	  1980s	  met	  with	  resistance	  by	  some	  
economists,	  who	  preferred	  to	  retain	  the	  standard	  neo-­‐classical	  model.	  	  They	  
introduced	  several	  arguments	  for	  why	  psychology	  could	  safely	  be	  ignored.	  In	  this	  
essay	  I	  show	  that	  these	  arguments	  have	  been	  rejected,	  both	  theoretically	  and	  
empirically,	  so	  it	  is	  time	  to	  move	  on.	  The	  new	  approach	  to	  economics	  should	  include	  
two	  different	  kinds	  of	  theories:	  normative	  models	  that	  characterize	  the	  optimal	  
solution	  to	  specific	  problems	  and	  descriptive	  models	  that	  capture	  how	  humans	  
actually	  behave.	  	  The	  latter	  theories	  will	  incorporate	  some	  variables	  I	  call	  supposedly	  
irrelevant	  factors.	  	  By	  adding	  these	  factors	  such	  as	  framing	  or	  temptation	  we	  can	  
improve	  the	  explanatory	  power	  of	  economic	  models.	  If	  everyone	  includes	  all	  the	  
factors	  that	  do	  determine	  economic	  behavior,	  then	  the	  field	  of	  behavioral	  economics	  
will	  no	  longer	  need	  to	  exist.	  	  
	  
 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
†	  This	  article	  is	  based	  on	  my	  presidential	  address	  given	  at	  the	  American	  Economic	  Association	  annual	  meeting	  in	  January	  2016.	  	  
*	  University	  of	  Chicago,	  5807	  South	  Woodlawn	  Avenue,	  Chicago,	  IL	  60637	  (e-­‐mail:	  mailto:richard.thaler@chicagobooth.edu).	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606 
 
Behavioral Economics: Past, Present, and Future† 
BY	  RICHARD	  H.	  THALER*	  
In	   recent	   years	   there	   has	   been	   growing	   interest	   in	   the	   mixture	   of	   psychology	   and	  
economics	   that	   has	   come	   to	   be	   known	   as	   “behavioral	   economics.”	   As	   is	   true	   with	   many	  
seemingly	  overnight	  success	  stories,	  this	  one	  has	  been	  brewing	  for	  quite	  a	  while.	  My	  first	  
paper	  on	  the	  subject	  was	  published	  in	  1980,	  hot	  on	  the	  heels	  of	  Kahneman	  and	  Tversky’s	  
(1979)	  blockbuster	  on	  prospect	  theory,	  and	  there	  were	  earlier	  forerunners,	  most	  notably	  
Simon	  (1955,	  1957)	  and	  Katona	  (1951,	  1953).	  
The	   rise	   of	   behavioral	   economics	   is	   sometimes	   characterized	   as	   a	   kind	   of	   paradigm-­‐
shifting	   revolution	   within	   economics,	   but	   I	   think	   that	   is	   a	   misreading	   of	   the	   history	   of	  
economic	   thought.	   It	   would	   be	   more	   accurate	   to	   say	   that	   the	   methodology	   of	   behavioral	  
economics	  returns	  economic	  thinking	  to	  the	  way	  it	  began,	  with	  Adam	  Smith,	  and	  continued	  
through	  the	  time	  of	  Irving	  Fisher	  and	  John	  Maynard	  Keynes	  in	  the	  1930s.	  
In	  spite	  of	  this	  early	  tradition	  within	  the	  field,	  the	  behavioral	  approach	  to	  economics	  met	  
with	  considerable	  resistance	  within	  the	  profession	  until	  relatively	  recently.	  In	  this	  essay	  I	  
begin	   by	   documenting	   some	   of	   the	   historical	   precedents	   for	   utilizing	   a	   psychologically	  
realistic	   depiction	   of	   the	   representative	   agent.	   I	   then	   turn	   to	   a	   discussion	   of	   the	   many	  
arguments	  that	  have	  been	  put	  forward	  in	  favor	  of	  retaining	  the	  idealized	  model	  of	  Homo	  
economicus	   even	   in	   the	   face	   of	   apparently	   contradictory	   evidence.	   I	   argue	   that	   such	  
arguments	   have	   been	   refuted,	   both	   theoretically	   and	   empirically,	   including	   in	   the	   realm	  
where	  we	  might	  expect	  rationality	  to	  abound:	  the	  financial	  markets.	  As	  such,	  it	  is	  time	  to	  
move	  on	  to	  a	  more	  constructive	  approach.	  
On	  the	  theory	  side,	  the	  basic	  problem	  is	  that	  we	  are	  relying	  on	  one	  theory	  to	  accomplish	  
two	  rather	  different	  goals,	  namely	  to	  characterize	  optimal	  behavior	  and	  to	  predict	  actual	  
behavior.	  We	  should	  not	  abandon	  the	  first	  type	  of	  theories	  as	  they	  are	  essential	  building	  
blocks	   for	   any	   kind	   of	   economic	   analysis,	   but	   we	   must	   augment	   them	   with	   additional	  
descriptive	  theories	  that	  are	  derived	  from	  data	  rather	  than	  axioms.	  
As	  for	  empirical	  work,	  the	  behavioral	  approach	  offers	  the	  opportunity	  to	  develop	  better	  
models	  of	  economic	  behavior	  by	  incorporating	  insights	  from	  other	  social	  science	  disciplines.	  
To	  illustrate	  this	  more	  constructive	  approach,	  I	  focus	  on	  one	  strong	  prediction	  made	  by	  the	  
traditional	  model,	  namely	  that	  there	  is	  a	  set	  of	  factors	  that	  will	  have	  no	  effect	  on	  economic	  
behavior.	   I	   refer	   to	   these	   as	   supposedly	   irrelevant	   factors	   or	   SIFs.	   Contrary	   to	   the	  
predictions	   of	   traditional	   theory,	   SIFs	   matter;	   in	   fact,	   in	   some	   situations	   the	   single	   most	  
important	   determinant	   of	   behavior	   is	   a	   SIF.	   Finally,	   I	   turn	   to	   the	   future.	   Spoiler	   alert:	   I	  
predict	  that	  behavioral	  economics	  will	  eventually	  disappear.	  
I.	   The	  Historical	  Roots	  of	  Behavioral	  Economics	  
As	  Simon	  (1987,	  p.	  612)	  noted,	  the	  term	  “behavioral	  economics”	  is	  a	  bit	  odd.	  “The	  phrase	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
†	  This	  article	  is	  based	  on	  my	  presidential	  address	  given	  at	  the	  American	  Economic	  Association	  annual	  meeting	  in	  January	  2016.	  	  
The	  actual	  lecture	  can	  be	  viewed	  on	  the	  AEA	  website:	  https://www.aeaweb.org/webcasts/2016/Behavioral.php	  	  This	  article	  
also	  draws	  upon	  my	  recent	  book	  Misbehaving:	  The	  Making	  of	  Behavioral	  Economics,	  which	  contains	  a	  much	  more	  extensive	  
bibliography.	  	  	  
*	  University	  of	  Chicago,	  5807	  South	  Woodlawn	  Avenue,	  Chicago,	  IL	  60637	  (e-­‐mail:	  mailto:richard.thaler@chicagobooth.edu).	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

‘behavioral	  economics’	  appears	  to	  be	  a	  pleonasm.	  What	  ‘non-­‐behavioral’	  economics	  can	  we	  
contrast	   with	   it?	   The	   answer	   to	   this	   question	   is	   found	   in	   the	   specific	   assumptions	   about	  
human	   behavior	   that	   are	   made	   in	   neoclassical	   economic	   theory.”	   These	   assumptions	   are	  
familiar	   to	   all	   students	   of	   economic	   theory.	   (i) Agents	   have	   well-­‐defined	   preferences	   and	  
unbiased	  beliefs	  and	  expectations.	  (ii) They	  make	  optimal	  choices	  based	  on	  these	  beliefs	  and	  
preferences.	  This	  in	  turn	  implies	  that	  agents	  have	  infinite	  cognitive	  abilities	  (or,	  put	  another	  
way,	  are	  as	  smart	  as	  the	  smartest	  economist)	  and	  infinite	  willpower	  since	  they	  choose	  what	  
is	   best,	   not	   what	   is	   momentarily	   tempting.	   (iii) Although	   they	   may	   act	   altruistically,	  
especially	   toward	   close	   friends	   and	   family,	   their	   primary	   motivation	   is	   self-­‐interest.	   It	   is	  
these	  assumptions	  that	  define	  Homo	  economicus,	  or	  as	  I	  like	  to	  call	  them,	  Econs.	  Behavioral	  
economics	  simply	  replaces	  Econs	  with	  Homo	  sapiens,	  otherwise	  known	  as	  Humans.	  
To	   many	   economists	   these	   assumptions,	   along	   with	   the	   concept	   of	   “equilibrium,”	  
effectively	  define	  their	  discipline;	  that	  is,	  they	  study	  Econs	  in	  an	  abstract	  economy	  rather	  
than	  Humans	  in	  the	  real	  one.	  But	  such	  was	  not	  always	  the	  case.	  Indeed,	  Ashraf,	  Camerer,	  
and	   Loewenstein	   (2005)	   convincingly	   document	   that	   Adam	   Smith,	   often	   considered	   the	  
founder	  of	  economics	  as	  a	  discipline,	  was	  a	  bona	  fide	  behavioral	  economist.	  Consider	  just	  
three	   of	   the	   most	   important	   concepts	   of	   behavioral	   economics:	   overconfidence,	   loss	  
aversion,	  and	  self-­‐control.	  On	  overconfidence	  Smith	  	  (1776,	  p.	  1)	  commented	  on	  “the	  over-­‐
weening	  conceit	  which	  the	  greater	  part	  of	  men	  have	  of	  their	  own	  abilities”	  that	  leads	  them	  
to	   overestimate	   their	   chance	   of	   success.	   On	   the	   concept	   of	   loss	   aversion	   Smith	   (1759,	   p.	  
176–177)	   noted	   that	   “Pain … is,	   in	   almost	   all	   cases,	   a	   more	   pungent	   sensation	   than	   the	  
opposite	  and	  correspondent	  pleasure.”	  As	  for	  self-­‐control,	  and	  what	  we	  now	  call	  “present	  
bias,”	  Smith	  (1759,	  p.	  273)	  had	  this	  to	  say:	  “The	  pleasure	  which	  we	  are	  to	  enjoy	  ten	  years	  
hence,	   interests	   us	   so	   little	   in	   comparison	   with	   that	   which	   we	   may	   enjoy	   today.”	   George	  
Stigler	  was	  fond	  of	  saying	  that	  there	  was	  nothing	  new	  in	  economics,	  it	  had	  all	  been	  said	  by	  
Adam	  Smith.	  It	  turns	  out	  that	  was	  true	  for	  behavioral	  economics	  as	  well.	  
But	   Adam	   Smith	   was	   far	   from	   the	   only	   early	   economist	   who	   had	   good	   intuitions	   about	  
human	   behavior.	   Many	   who	   followed	   Smith,	   shared	   his	   views	   about	   time	   discounting.	   For	  
example,	  	  Pigou	  (1920,	  p.	  21)	  famously	  wrote	  that	  “Our	  telescopic	  faculty	  is	  defective	  and … we	  
therefore	  see	  future	  pleasures,	  as	  it	  were,	  on	  a	  diminished	  scale.”	  Similarly	  Fisher	  (1930,	  p.	  82),	  
who	  offered	  the	  first	  truly	  modern	  economic	  theory	  of	  intertemporal	  choice,	  did	  not	  think	  it	  
was	   a	   good	   description	   of	   behavior.	   He	   offered	   many	   colorful	   stories	   to	   support	   this	  
skepticism:	  “This	  is	  illustrated	  by	  the	  story	  of	  the	  farmer	  who	  would	  never	  mend	  his	  leaky	  
roof.	  When	  it	  rained,	  he	  could	  not	  stop	  the	  leak,	  and	  when	  it	  did	  not	  rain,	  there	  was	  no	  leak	  to	  
be	  stopped!”	  Keynes	  (1936,	  p.	  154)	  anticipated	  much	  of	  what	  is	  now	  called	  behavioral	  finance	  
in	  the	  General	  Theory.	  For	  example,	  he	  observed	  that	  “Day-­‐to-­‐day	  fluctuations	  in	  the	  profits	  of	  
existing	  investments,	  which	  are	  obviously	  of	  an	  ephemeral	  and	  non-­‐significant	  character,	  tend	  
to	  have	  an	  altogether	  excessive,	  and	  even	  absurd,	  influence	  on	  the	  market.”	  
Many	  economists	  even	  thought	  that	  psychology	  (then	  still	  in	  its	  infancy)	  should	  play	  an	  
important	  role	  in	  economics.	  Pareto	  (1906,	  p.	  21)	  wrote	  that	  “The	  foundation	  of	  political	  
economy,	  and,	  in	  general	  of	  every	  social	  science,	  is	  evidently	  psychology.	  A	  day	  may	  come	  
when	  we	  shall	  be	  able	  to	  decide	  the	  laws	  of	  social	  science	  from	  the	  principles	  of	  psychology.”	  
John	  Maurice	  Clark	  (1918,	  p.	  4),	  the	  son	  of	  John	  Bates	  Clark,	  went	  further.	  “The	  economist	  
may	   attempt	   to	   ignore	   psychology,	   but	   it	   is	   sheer	   impossibility	   for	   him	   to	   ignore	   human	  
nature … If	   the	   economist	   borrows	   his	   conception	   of	   man	   from	   the	   psychologist,	   his	  
constructive	  work	  may	  have	  some	  chance	  of	  remaining	  purely	  economic	  in	  character.	  But	  if	  
he	  does	  not,	  he	  will	  not	  thereby	  avoid	  psychology.	  Rather,	  he	  will	  force	  himself	  to	  make	  his	  
own,	  and	  it	  will	  be	  bad	  psychology.”	  
It	  has	  been	  nearly	  100	  years	  since	  Clark	  wrote	  those	  words	  but	  they	  still	  ring	  true,	  and	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

behavioral	   economists	   have	   been	   taking	   Clark’s	   advice,	   which	   is	   to	   borrow	   some	   good	  
psychology	  rather	  than	  invent	  bad	  psychology.	  Why	  did	  this	  common	  sense	  suggestion	  fail	  
to	  gain	  much	  traction	  for	  so	  long?	  
II.	   Explainawaytions	  
In	  the	  process	  of	  making	  economics	  more	  mathematically	  rigorous	  after	  World	  War	  II,	  
the	   economics	   profession	   appears	   to	   have	   lost	   its	   good	   intuition	   about	   human	   behavior.	  
Defective	  telescopic	  facilities	  were	  replaced	  with	  time-­‐consistent	  exponential	  discounting.	  
Over-­‐weening	   conceits	   were	   replaced	   by	   rational	   expectations.	   And	   ephemeral	   shifts	   in	  
animal	   spirits	   were	   replaced	   by	   the	   efficient	   market	   hypothesis.	   Economics	   textbooks	   no	  
longer	  had	  any	  Humans.	  How	  did	  this	  happen?	  
I	  believe	  that	  the	  most	  plausible	  explanation	  is	  that	  models	  of	  rational	  behavior	  became	  
standard	  because	  they	  were	  the	  easiest	  to	  solve.	  This	  conjecture	  is	  not	  meant	  as	  a	  put-­‐down.	  
One	  begins	  learning	  physics	  by	  studying	  the	  behavior	  of	  objects	  in	  a	  vacuum;	  atmosphere	  
can	  be	  added	  later.	  But	  physicists	  never	  denied	  the	  existence	  or	  importance	  of	  air;	  instead	  
they	   worked	   harder	   and	   built	   more	   complicated	   models.	   For	   many	   years,	   economists	  
reacted	  to	  questions	  about	  the	  realism	  of	  the	  basic	  model	  by	  doing	  the	  equivalent	  of	  either	  
denying	  the	  existence	  of	  air,	  or	  by	  claiming	  that	  it	  just	  didn’t	  matter	  all	  that	  much.	  Matthew	  
Rabin	  has	  dubbed	  these	  defensive	  reactions	  as	  “explainawaytions.”1	  
Let’s	  be	  blunt.	  The	  model	  of	  human	  behavior	  based	  on	  the	  premise	  that	  people	  optimize	  
is	   and	   has	   always	   been	   highly	   implausible.	   For	   one	   thing,	   the	   model	   does	   not	   take	   into	  
consideration	  the	  degree	  of	  difficulty	  of	  the	  problem	  that	  agents	  are	  assumed	  to	  be	  “solving.”	  
Consider	  two	  games:	  tic-­‐tac-­‐toe	  and	  chess.	  A	  reasonably	  bright	  first	  grader	  can	  learn	  to	  play	  
the	  optimal	  strategy	  in	  tic-­‐tac-­‐toe,	  and	  so	  a	  model	  that	  assumes	  players	  choose	  optimally	  in	  
this	  game	  will	  be	  a	  pretty	  good	  approximation	  of	  actual	  behavior	  for	  bright	  children	  and	  
sober	   adults.	   Chess,	   on	   the	   other	   hand,	   is	   quite	   a	   different	   matter.	   Most	   of	   us	   play	   chess	  
terribly	  and	  would	  have	  no	  chance	  of	  beating	  a	  free	  program	  on	  our	  smartphones,	  much	  less	  
a	  grandmaster.	  So,	  it	  makes	  no	  sense	  to	  assume	  that	  the	  representative	  agent	  plays	  chess	  as	  
well	  as	  tic-­‐tac-­‐toe.	  But	  that	  is	  essentially	  what	  we	  assume	  in	  economics.	  
When	   we	   assume	   that	   agents	   maximize	   utility	   (or	   profits)	   we	   do	   not	   condition	   that	  
assumption	   on	   task	   difficulty.	   We	   assume	   that	   people	   are	   equally	   good	   at	   deciding	   how	  
many	  eggs	  to	  buy	  for	  breakfast	  and	  solving	  for	  the	  right	  amount	  to	  save	  for	  retirement.	  That	  
assumption	  is,	  on	  the	  face	  of	  it,	  preposterous.	  So	  why	  has	  it	  stuck?	  There	  has	  been	  a	  litany	  of	  
explainawaytions.	  
A.	  As	  If	  
Grumblings	   within	   the	   profession	   about	   the	   so-­‐called	   “marginalist	   revolution”	   were	  
present	  in	  the	  1940s,	  and	  this	  journal	  published	  several	  articles	  debating	  the	  realism	  of	  the	  
theory	  that	  firms	  set	  output	  and	  hire	  workers	  by	  calculating	  the	  point	  at	  which	  marginal	  
cost	  equals	  marginal	  revenue.	  One	  of	  the	  participants	  in	  this	  debate	  was	  Richard	  Lester	  of	  
Princeton	  who	  had	  the	  temerity	  to	  ask	  the	  owners	  of	  business	  firms	  how	  they	  actually	  made	  
such	   decisions.	   Whatever	   firms	   were	   doing	   did	   not	   seem	   to	   be	   captured	   by	   the	   term	  
“equating	  at	  the	  margin,”	  and	  Lester	  (1946,	  p.	  81)	  ended	  his	  paper	  this	  way:	  “This	  paper	  
raises	  grave	  doubts	  as	  to	  the	  validity	  of	  conventional	  marginal	  theory	  and	  the	  assumptions	  
on	  which	  it	  rests.”	  Machlup	  (1946)	  took	  up	  the	  defense	  of	  the	  traditional	  theory	  and	  argued	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1 Please	  direct	  all	  complaints	  about	  this	  term	  directly	  to	  Matthew. 	  
	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

that	  even	  if	  firm	  owners	  did	  not	  know	  how	  to	  calculate	  marginal	  costs	  and	  revenues,	  they	  
would	  make	  decisions	  that	  would	  closely	  approximate	  such	  choices	  using	  their	  intuitions.	  
Machlup’s	   defense	   was	   refined	   and	   polished	   by	   Friedman	   (1953,	   p.	   21)	   in	   his	   famous	  
essay	  “The	  Methodology	  of	  Positive	  Economics.”	  Friedman	  brushed	  aside	  questions	  about	  
the	   realism	   of	   assumptions	   and	   argued	   that	   instead	   theories	   should	   be	   judged	   based	   on	  
their	  ability	  to	  predict	  behavior.	  He	  proposed	  what	  is	  now	  a	  well-­‐known	  analogy	  about	  an	  
expert	  billiard	  player:	  “excellent	  predictions	  would	  be	  yielded	  by	  the	  hypothesis	  that	  the	  
billiard	   player	   made	   his	   shots	   as	  if	   he	   knew	   the	   complicated	   mathematical	   formulas	   that	  
would	   give	   the	   optimum	   directions	   of	   travel,	   could	   estimate	   by	   eye	   the	   angles,	   etc.,	  
describing	  the	  location	  of	  the	  balls,	  could	  make	  lightening	  calculations	  from	  the	  formulas,	  
and	   could	   then	   make	   the	   balls	   travel	   in	   the	   direction	   indicated	   by	   the	   formulas.	   Our	  
confidence	  in	  this	  hypothesis	  is	  not	  based	  on	  the	  belief	  that	  billiard	  players,	  even	  expert	  
ones,	   can	   or	   do	   go	   through	   the	   process	   described;	   it	   derives	   rather	   from	   the	   belief	   that,	  
unless	  in	  some	  way	  or	  other	  they	  were	  capable	  of	  reaching	  essentially	  the	  same	  result,	  they	  
would	  not	  in	  fact	  be	  expert	  billiard	  players.”	  
Friedman	  had	  a	  well-­‐deserved	  reputation	  as	  a	  brilliant	  communicator	  and	  debater,	  and	  
those	  skills	  are	  on	  full	  display	  in	  this	  passage.	  Using	  the	  mere	  two-­‐word	  phrase	  “as	  if,”	  
Friedman	   essentially	   ended	   the	   debate	   about	   the	   realism	   of	   assumptions	   in	   economics.	  
But	  given	  proper	  scrutiny,	  we	  can	  see	  that	  this	  passage	  is	  simply	  a	  verbal	  sleight	  of	  hand.	  
First	  of	  all,	  it	  is	  no	  accident	  that	  Friedman	  chooses	  to	  discuss	  an	  expert	  billiard	  player.	  The	  
behavior	   of	   an	   expert	   in	   many	   activities	   may	   indeed	   be	   well	   captured	   by	   a	   model	   that	  
assumes	  optimal	  behavior.	  But	  what	  about	  non-­‐experts?	  Isn’t	  economic	  theory	  supposed	  
to	  be	  a	  theory	  about	  the	  behavior	  of	  all	  economic	  agents,	  not	  just	  experts?	  The	  life-­‐cycle	  
hypothesis	  is	  intended	  to	  be	  a	  theory	  of	  how	  the	  typical	  citizen	  saves	  for	  retirement,	  not	  
just	  those	  with	  MBAs.	  
There	  is	  another	  problem	  with	  Friedman’s	  defense,	  which	  is	  that	  even	  experts	  are	  unable	  
to	  optimize	  when	  the	  problems	  are	  difficult.	  To	  illustrate,	  let’s	  return	  to	  the	  game	  of	  chess.	  
Since	  chess	  has	  no	  stochastic	  elements,	  it	  has	  long	  been	  known	  that	  if	  both	  players	  optimize	  
then	   one	   of	   the	   players	   (either	   the	   one	   who	   goes	   first	   or	   second)	   must	   have	   a	   winning	  
strategy,	  or	  neither	  of	  them	  do	  and	  the	  game	  will	  lead	  to	  a	  draw.	  However,	  unlike	  checkers,	  
which	  has	  been	  “solved”	  (if	  both	  players	  optimize	  the	  game	  is	  a	  draw)	  chess	  matches	  do	  not	  
yield	  predictable	  outcomes	  even	  in	  matches	  between	  grandmasters.	  Sometimes	  white	  (first	  
player)	  wins,	  less	  often	  black	  wins,	  and	  there	  are	  many	  draws.	  This	  proves	  that	  even	  the	  
best	  chess	  players	  in	  the	  world	  do	  not	  maximize.	  Of	  course	  one	  can	  argue	  that	  chess	  is	  a	  
hard	  game,	  which	  is	  true.	  But,	  many	  economic	  decisions	  are	  difficult	  as	  well.	  
A	  second	  line	  of	  defense	  is	  to	  concede	  that	  we	  don’t	  all	  do	  everything	  like	  experts	  but	  
argue	  that,	  if	  our	  errors	  are	  randomly	  distributed	  with	  mean	  zero,	  then	  they	  will	  wash	  out	  
in	  the	  aggregate,	  leaving	  the	  predictions	  of	  the	  model	  unbiased	  on	  average.	  This	  was	  often	  
the	   reaction	   to	   Simon’s	   (1955)	   suggestion	   that	   people	   “satisfice”	   (meaning	   grope	   for	   a	  
satisfactory	  solution	  rather	  than	  solve	  for	  an	  optimal	  one).	  If	  the	  choices	  of	  a	  satisficer	  are	  
not	   systematically	   different	   from	   an	   optimizer,	   then	   the	   models	   lead	   to	   identical	   average	  
predictions	  (though	  satisficers	  will	  have	  more	  noise).	  This	  line	  of	  argument	  was	  refuted	  by	  
the	  seminal	  work	  of	  Daniel	  Kahneman	  and	  Amos	  Tversky	  in	  the	  1970s.	  
In	  a	  brilliant	  series	  of	  experiments	  on	  what	  psychologists	  refer	  to	  as	  “judgment”	  and	  what	  
economists	   might	   call	   “expectations”	   or	   “beliefs,”	   Tversky	   and	   Kahneman	   (1974)	   showed	  
that	   humans	   make	   judgments	   that	   are	   systematically	   biased.	   Furthermore,	   these	   errors	  
were	   predictable	   based	   on	   a	   theory	   of	   human	   cognition.	   Kahneman	   and	   Tversky’s	  
hypothesis	   was	   that	   people	   often	   make	   judgments	   using	   some	   kind	   of	   rule	   of	   thumb	   or	  
heuristic.	  An	  example	  is	  the	  “availability	  heuristic”	  in	  which	  people	  estimate	  the	  frequency	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

of	   some	   event	   by	   the	   ease	   with	   which	   they	   can	   recall	   instances	   of	   that	   event.	   Using	   this	  
heuristic	   is	   perfectly	   sensible	   since	   frequency	   and	   ease	   of	   recall	   are	   generally	   positively	  
correlated.	  However,	  use	  of	  the	  heuristic	  will	  lead	  to	  predictable	  errors	  in	  those	  situations	  
where	  frequency	  and	  ease	  of	  recall	  diverge.	  For	  example,	  when	  asked	  to	  estimate	  the	  ratio	  
of	  gun	  deaths	  by	  homicide	  to	  gun	  deaths	  by	  suicide	  in	  the	  United	  States,	  most	  people	  think	  
homicide	   gun	   deaths	   are	   more	   common,	   whereas	   there	   are	   in	   fact	   nearly	   twice	   as	   many	  
gun-­‐inflicted	  suicides	  as	  homicides.	  These	  are	  expectations	  that	  are	  not	  close	  to	  being	  “as	  if”	  
rational—they	  are	  predictably	  biased.	  
Kahneman	  and	  Tversky’s	  second	  influential	  line	  of	  research	  was	  on	  decision	  making.	  In	  
particular,	  in	  1979	  they	  published	  their	  paper	  on	  prospect	  theory,	  which	  was	  proposed	  as	  a	  
“descriptive”	   (or	   what	   Milton	   Friedman	   would	   have	   called	   “positive”)	   model	   of	   decision	  
making	  under	  uncertainty.	  Prospect	  theory	  was	  intended	  to	  be	  a	  descriptive	  alternative	  to	  
von	  Neumann	  and	  Morgenstern’s	  (1947)	  expected	  utility	  theory,	  which	  is	  rightly	  considered	  
by	   most	   economists	   to	   characterize	   how	   a	   rational	   agent	   should	   make	   risky	   choices.	  
Kahneman	  and	  Tversky’s	  research	  documented	  numerous	  choices	  that	  violate	  any	  sensible	  
definition	  of	  rational.	  This	  pair	  of	  problems	  posed	  to	  different	  groups	  of	  subjects	  offers	  a	  
good	  illustration.	  
Problem	   1.—Imagine	   that	   you	   face	   the	   following	   pair	   of	   concurrent	   decisions.	   First	  
examine	  both	  decisions,	  and	  then	  indicate	  the	  options	  you	  prefer.	  
Decision	  (i)	  Choose	  between:	  
	   A.	   A	  sure	  gain	  of	  $240	  
[84%]	  
	   B.	   25%	  chance	  to	  gain	  $1,000	  and	  
	  
75%	  chance	  to	  gain	  or	  lose	  nothing	  	  
[16%]	  
Decision	  (ii)	  Choose	  between:	  
	   C.	   A	  sure	  loss	  of	  $750	  
[13%]	  
	   D.	   A	  75%	  chance	  to	  lose	  $1,000	  and	  a	  
	  
25%	  chance	  to	  lose	  nothing	  
[87%]	  
The	  numbers	  in	  brackets	  indicate	  the	  percentage	  of	  subjects	  that	  chose	  that	  option.	  We	  
observe	  a	  pattern	  that	  was	  frequently	  displayed:	  subjects	  were	  risk	  averse	  in	  the	  domain	  of	  
gains	  but	  risk	  seeking	  in	  the	  domain	  of	  losses.	  It	  is	  not	  immediately	  obvious	  that	  there	  is	  
anything	  particularly	  disturbing	  about	  these	  choices;	  that	  is,	  until	  one	  studies	  the	  following	  
problem.	  
Problem	  2.—Choose	  between:	  
	   E.	   25%	  chance	  to	  win	  $240	  
	  
and	  75%	  chance	  to	  lose	  $760	  
[0%]	  
	   F.	   25%	  chance	  to	  win	  $250	  
	  
and	  75%	  chance	  to	  lose	  $750	  
[100%]	  
Inspection	  reveals	  that	  although	  Problem	  2	  is	  worded	  differently,	  its	  choices	  are	  formally	  
identical	   to	   those	   in	   Problem	   1.	   The	   difference	   is	   that	   some	   simple	   arithmetic	   has	   been	  
performed	   for	   the	   subjects.	   Once	   these	   calculations	   are	   made	   it	   becomes	   clear	   to	   every	  
subject	  that	  option	  F	  dominates	  option	  E,	  and	  everyone	  chooses	  accordingly.	  The	  difficulty,	  
of	  course,	  is	  that	  option	  E,	  which	  no	  one	  selects,	  is	  made	  up	  of	  the	  combination	  of	  options	  A	  
and	   D,	   both	   of	   which	   were	   chosen	   by	   a	   large	   majority	   of	   subjects,	   while	   option	   F,	   which	  
everyone	   selects,	   is	   a	   combination	   of	   B	   and	   C,	   options	   that	   were	   highly	   unpopular	   in	  
Problem	   1.	   Thus	   this	   pair	   of	   problems	   illustrates	   two	   findings	   that	   are	   embarrassing	   to	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

rational	  choice	  adherents.	  First,	  subjects’	  answers	  depend	  on	  the	  way	  a	  problem	  is	  worded	  
or	  “framed,”	  behavior	  that	  is	  inconsistent	  with	  almost	  any	  formal	  model.	  Second,	  by	  utilizing	  
clever	   framing,	   a	   majority	   of	   subjects	   can	   be	   induced	   to	   select	   a	   pair	   of	   options	   that	   are	  
dominated	   by	   another	   pair.	   Once	   again,	   this	   behavior	   does	   not	   seem	   consistent	   with	   the	  
idea	  that	  people	  are	  choosing	  as	  if	  they	  are	  rational.	  
B.	  Experiments,	  Incentives,	  and	  Learning	  
A	   second	   class	   of	   explainawaytions	   emerged	   in	   the	   1980s,	   in	   part	   as	   a	   reaction	   to	   the	  
findings	  of	  Kahneman	  and	  Tversky	  and	  an	  early	  paper	  of	  mine	  (Thaler	  1980).	  These	  retorts,	  
usually	  delivered	  orally	  in	  workshops	  and	  conference	  presentations	  rather	  than	  in	  print,2	  
were	  intended	  to	  be	  justifications	  for	  continuing	  business	  as	  usual.	  Some	  of	  the	  critiques	  
were	   aimed	   at	   the	   empirical	   methods	   used	   in	   these	   early	   papers,	   namely	   hypothetical	  
survey	   questions	   such	   as	   problems	   1	   and	   2	   above.	   Economists	   have	   never	   been	   very	  
impressed	   by	   such	   data	   because	   the	   subjects	   have	   nothing	   on	   the	   line.	   Furthermore,	  
typically	  these	  questions	  were	  just	  asked	  once,	  so	  many	  argued	  that	  they	  were	  not	  a	  good	  
indication	  of	  what	  people	  would	  do	  in	  real-­‐life	  situations	  in	  which	  they	  had	  an	  opportunity	  
to	   learn	   from	   prior	   mistakes.	   So	   the	   critique	   was	   two-­‐fold.	   First,	   if	   you	   raise	   the	   stakes	  
people	  will	  take	  the	  questions	  more	  seriously	  and	  choose	  in	  a	  manner	  more	  consistent	  with	  
optimization.	   Second,	   if	   given	   a	   chance	   to	   learn,	   people	   will	   get	   it	   right.	   Often	   the	   same	  
person	  would	  make	  both	  of	  these	  critiques,	  thinking	  that	  they	  reinforced	  one	  another.	  
Of	   course	   there	   is	   no	   doubt	   that	   the	   ability	   to	   practice	   improves	   performance	   in	   most	  
tasks.	  No	  one	  plays	  well	  in	  his	  first	  game	  of	  chess,	  or	  billiards	  for	  that	  matter.	  And	  most	  
people	  eventually	  become	  at	  least	  competent	  at	  highly	  complex	  tasks	  such	  as	  riding	  a	  bike	  
or	  running	  down	  a	  flight	  of	  stairs.	  Similarly,	  the	  notion	  that	  people	  will	  pay	  more	  attention	  
when	   the	   stakes	   go	   up	   is	   intuitively	   appealing.	   Certainly	   we	   pay	   more	   attention	   when	  
buying	   a	   car	   than	   when	   deciding	   what	   to	   order	   for	   lunch.	   But	   rather	   than	   these	   two	  
arguments	  working	  together,	  they	  actually	  go	  in	  opposite	  directions.	  The	  reason	  this	  is	  so	  is	  
that,	  as	  a	  rule,	  the	  higher	  the	  stakes,	  the	  less	  often	  we	  get	  to	  do	  something.	  
Consider	  the	  following	  list	  of	  economic	  activities:	  deciding	  how	  much	  milk	  to	  buy	  at	  the	  
grocery	  store,	  choosing	  a	  sweater,	  buying	  a	  car,	  buying	  a	  home,	  selecting	  a	  career,	  choosing	  
a	  spouse,	  saving	  for	  retirement.	  Most	  households	  have	  mastered	  the	  art	  of	  milk	  inventory	  
management	  through	  trial	  and	  error.	  Buy	  too	  much	  and	  it	  spoils,	  buy	  too	  little	  and	  you	  have	  
to	  make	  an	  extra	  trip	  to	  the	  convenience	  store.But	  if	  households	  do	  this	  (say)	  twice	  a	  week,	  
eventually	  they	  figure	  it	  out,	  at	  least	  until	  the	  children	  move	  out	  of	  the	  house	  or	  switch	  to	  
beer.	  Few	  of	  us	  buy	  cars	  often	  enough	  to	  get	  very	  good	  at	  it,	  and	  the	  really	  big	  decisions	  like	  
careers,	  marriages,	  and	  retirement	  saving	  give	  very	  little	  room	  for	  learning.	  So	  critics	  can’t	  
have	   it	   both	   ways.	   Either	   the	   real	   world	   is	   mostly	   high	   stakes	   or	   it	   offers	   myriad	  
opportunities	  to	  learn—not	  both.	  
Even	  in	  domains	  where	  there	  are	  multiple	  opportunities	  to	  learn,	  people	  may	  not	  make	  
the	   best	   of	   those	   situations.	   Daniel	   Kahneman	   and	   I	   ran	   an	   experiment	   years	   ago	   that	  
illustrates	   this	   point.	   (We	   never	   published	   the	   results	   so	   the	   details	   will	   be	   sketchy.)	  
Subjects	  were	  given	  forms	  that	  looked	  something	  like	  this:	  
Heads:	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  …	  18	  19	  20	  
Tails:	   1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  …	  18	  19	  20	  
They	  were	  then	  shown	  two	  large	  manila	  envelopes	  that	  were	  labeled	  Heads	  and	  Tails	  and	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2 However,	  see	  the	  papers	  in	  Hogarth	  and	  Reder	  (1986,	  1987)	  for	  some	  written	  versions. 	  
	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

were	   shown	   that	   each	   envelope	   contained	   20	   poker	   chips	   numbered	   from	   1	   to	   20.	   The	  
experimenter	  said	  he	  would	  first	  flip	  a	  coin	  and	  then,	  depending	  on	  the	  outcome,	  choose	  a	  
poker	  chip	  from	  the	  respective	  envelope.	  Subjects	  were	  allowed	  to	  circle	  five	  numbers	  on	  
their	  form,	  dividing	  their	  choices	  as	  they	  wished	  between	  the	  heads	  and	  tails	  rows.	  When	  
the	   experimenter	   selected	   a	   chip	   and	   announced	   the	   result,	   for	   example	   “Heads,	   17”	   any	  
subject	   who	   had	   circled	   the	   winning	   coin	   face	   and	   number	   would	   win	   some	   money.	  
Specifically,	  if	  the	  chip	  came	  from	  the	  Heads	  envelope	  winners	  would	  be	  paid	  $2,	  but	  if	  the	  
chip	  came	  from	  the	  Tails	  envelope	  they	  would	  win	  $3.	  
Of	   course	   the	   optimal	   strategy	   in	   this	   game	   is	   to	   only	   circle	   numbers	   in	   the	   Tails	   row	  
since	  those	  have	  a	  50	  percent	  higher	  expected	  payoff,	  but	  this	  strategy	  was	  not	  obvious	  to	  
everyone.	  About	  half	  the	  subjects	  (MBA	  students	  at	  a	  top	  university)	  adopted	  the	  correct	  
strategy	  of	  circling	  only	  Tails,	  but	  the	  rest	  used	  what	  might	  called	  an	  “inept	  mixed	  strategy,”	  
dividing	   their	   choices	   between	   Heads	   and	   Tails,	   with	   the	   most	   common	   allocation	   being	  
three	  Tails	  and	  two	  Heads,	  matching	  the	  ratio	  of	  the	  payoffs.3	  
The	   question	   that	   Kahneman	   and	   I	   were	   most	   interested	   in,	   however,	   was	   not	   these	  
initial	  choices.	  This	  was	  an	  experiment	  about	  learning.	  So	  we	  had	  the	  subjects	  repeat	  the	  
same	  task	  nine	  more	  times.	  Each	  time	  the	  subjects	  got	  feedback	  about	  the	  outcome	  of	  the	  
coin	  toss	  and	  the	  number	  drawn,	  and	  the	  winning	  guessers	  were	  paid	  in	  cash	  immediately	  
in	  plain	  view	  of	  the	  other	  subjects.	  Try	  to	  guess	  the	  results	  as	  a	  thought	  experiment.	  
Of	   the	   subjects	   that	   did	   not	   figure	   out	   the	   “all	   Tails”	   strategy	   immediately,	   how	   many	  
learned	  to	  use	  that	  strategy	  over	  the	  course	  of	  the	  nine	  additional	  trials?	  The	  answer	  is	  one.	  
One	  subject	  switched	  at	  some	  point	  to	  an	  all	  Tails	  strategy,	  but	  that	  subject	  was	  offset	  by	  
another	  subject	  who	  had	  circled	  only	  Tails	  on	  the	  first	  trial,	  but	  then	  switched	  to	  the	  inept	  
mixed	  strategy	  at	  some	  point	  during	  the	  “learning”	  phase.	  
It	  is	  instructive	  to	  consider	  why	  there	  was	  essentially	  no	  learning	  in	  this	  experiment.	  We	  
know	  from	  psychology	  that	  learning	  takes	  place	  when	  there	  is	  useful,	  immediate	  feedback.	  
When	  learning	  to	  drive	  we	  quickly	  see	  how	  much	  pressure	  to	  use	  on	  the	  accelerator	  and	  
brake	  pedals	  in	  order	  to	  start	  and	  stop	  smoothly.	  In	  the	  experiment,	  however,	  the	  subjects	  
were	  first	  told	  the	  outcome	  of	  the	  coin	  flip,	  then	  the	  number	  drawn.	  Obviously,	  about	  half	  
the	  time	  the	  coin	  came	  up	  Heads,	  and	  those	  who	  were	  including	  Heads	  in	  their	  portfolio	  
were	  pleased	  to	  be	  still	  in	  the	  game	  (if	  only	  for	  another	  few	  seconds).	  Furthermore,	  every	  
time	  that	  someone	  won	  some	  money	  from	  a	  Heads	  outcome,	  there	  was	  some	  reinforcement	  
for	  continuing	  to	  include	  some	  of	  that	  “strategy”	  in	  the	  portfolio.	  
The	   general	   point	   is	   that	   learning	   can	   be	   difficult	   even	   in	   a	   very	   simple	   environment.	  
Those	   who	   teach	   an	   introductory	   course	   in	   economics	   know	   that	   many	   of	   the	   first	  
principles	  that	  are	  basic	  to	  rational	  choice	  models	  (such	  as	  the	  notion	  of	  opportunity	  costs)	  
are	   by	   no	   means	   intuitively	   obvious	   to	   the	   students.	   But	   our	   models	   assume	   they	   can	  
understand	  much	  more	  difficult	  concepts	  such	  as	  backward	  induction.	  
As	   for	   the	   argument	   that	   people	   will	   do	   better	   in	   experimental	   tasks	   if	   the	   stakes	   are	  
raised,	  there	  is	  little	  or	  no	  evidence	  to	  support	  this	  hypothesis.	  The	  first	  empirical	  test	  of	  
this	   idea	   was	   conducted	   by	   David	   Grether	   and	   Charles	   Plott	   (1979)	   in	   the	   context	   of	   an	  
investigation	  of	  the	  “preference	  reversal	  phenomenon,”	  discovered	  by	  psychologists	  Sarah	  
Lichtenstein	   and	   Paul	   Slovic	   (1971).	   Lichtenstein	   and	   Slovic	   presented	   subjects	   with	   two	  
gambles,	  one	  a	  near	  sure	  thing	  they	  called	  the	  p-­‐bet	  (for	  high	  probability)	  such	  as	  a	  35/36	  
chance	  to	  win	  $10,	  the	  other	  more	  risky	  called	  the	  $-­‐bet,	  such	  as	  an	  11/36	  chance	  to	  win	  $30,	  
a	  higher	  potential	  payoff.	  Subjects	  were	  asked	  to	  value	  each	  bet	  by	  naming	  the	  lowest	  price	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3 Likewise,	  when	  Heads	  and	  Tails	  aren’t	  equally	  likely,	  people	  tend	  to	  engage	  in	  “probability	  matching”	  behavior	  instead	  of	  
just	  picking	  the	  more	  likely	  outcome	  every	  time.	  See	  Vulkan	  (2000)	  for	  a	  survey	  aimed	  at	  economists. 	  
	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

at	  which	  they	  would	  sell	  it	  if	  they	  owned	  it,	  and	  also	  to	  choose	  which	  of	  the	  bets	  they	  would	  
rather	   have.	   The	   term	   “preference	   reversal”	   emerged	   from	   the	   fact	   that	   of	   those	   who	  
preferred	  the	  p-­‐bet,	  a	  majority	  reported	  a	  higher	  selling	  price	  for	  the	  $-­‐bet,	  implying	  that	  
they	  valued	  it	  more	  than	  the	  p-­‐bet.	  
Grether	  and	  Plott	  (1979)	  were	  perplexed	  by	  this	  finding	  and	  set	  out	  to	  determine	  which	  
mistake	  the	  psychologists	  must	  have	  made	  to	  obtain	  such	  an	  obviously	  wrong	  result.	  Since	  
the	  original	  study	  was	  based	  on	  hypothetical	  questions,	  one	  of	  the	  hypotheses	  Grether	  and	  
Plott	  investigated	  was	  whether	  the	  preference	  reversals	  would	  disappear	  if	  the	  bets	  were	  
played	  for	  real	  money.	  (They	  favored	  this	  hypothesis	  in	  spite	  of	  the	  fact	  that	  Lichtenstein	  
and	  Slovic	  (1973)	  had	  already	  replicated	  their	  findings	  for	  real	  money	  on	  the	  floor	  of	  a	  Las	  
Vegas	  casino.)	  What	  Grether	  and	  Plott	  found	  surprised	  them.	  Raising	  the	  stakes	  did	  have	  the	  
intended	  effect	  of	  inducing	  the	  subjects	  to	  pay	  more	  attention	  to	  their	  choices	  (so	  noise	  was	  
reduced)	  but	  preference	  reversals	  did	  not	  thereby	  vanish;	  rather,	  their	  frequency	  went	  up!	  
In	  the	  nearly	  40	  years	  since	  Grether	  and	  Plott’s	  seminal	  paper,	  I	  do	  not	  know	  of	  any	  findings	  
of	  “cognitive	  errors”	  that	  were	  discovered	  and	  replicated	  with	  hypothetical	  questions	  but	  
then	  vanished	  as	  soon	  as	  significant	  stakes	  were	  introduced.	  
C.	  The	  Invisible	  Handwave	  
There	   is	   a	   variation	   on	   the	   “if	   there	   is	   enough	   money	   at	   stake	   people	   will	   behave	   like	  
Econs”	  story	  that	  is	  a	  bit	  more	  complicated.	  In	  this	  version	  markets	  replace	  the	  enlightening	  
role	   of	   money.	   The	   idea	   is	   that	   when	   agents	   interact	   in	   a	   market	   environment,	   any	  
tendencies	  to	  misbehave	  will	  be	  vanquished.	  I	  call	  this	  argument	  the	  “invisible	  handwave”	  
because	  there	  is	  a	  vague	  allusion	  to	  Adam	  Smith	  embedded	  in	  there	  somewhere,	  and	  I	  claim	  
that	  it	  is	  impossible	  to	  complete	  the	  argument	  with	  both	  hands	  remaining	  still.	  
Suppose,	  for	  example,	  that	  Homer	  falls	  prey	  to	  the	  “sunk	  cost	  fallacy”	  and	  always	  finishes	  
whatever	  is	  put	  on	  his	  plate	  for	  dinner,	  since	  he	  doesn’t	  like	  to	  waste	  money.	  An	  invisible	  
handwaver	  might	  say,	  fine,	  he	  can	  do	  that	  at	  home,	  but	  when	  Homer	  engages	  in	  markets,	  such	  
misbehaving	  will	  be	  eliminated.	  Which	  raises	  the	  question:	  how	  exactly	  does	  this	  occur?	  If	  
Homer	  goes	  to	  a	  restaurant	  and	  finishes	  a	  rich	  dessert	  “because	  he	  paid	  for	  it”	  all	  that	  happens	  
to	  him	  is	  that	  he	  gets	  a	  bit	  chubbier.	  Competition	  does	  not	  solve	  the	  problem	  because	  there	  is	  
no	  market	  for	  restaurants	  that	  whisk	  the	  food	  away	  from	  customers	  as	  soon	  as	  they	  have	  
eaten	  more	  than	  X	  calories.	  
Indeed,	   thinking	   that	   markets	   will	   eradicate	   aberrant	   behavior	   shows	   a	   failure	   to	  
understand	  how	  markets	  work.	  Let’s	  consider	  two	  possible	  strategies	  firms	  might	  adopt	  in	  
the	  face	  of	  consumers	  making	  errors.	  Firms	  could	  try	  to	  teach	  them	  about	  the	  costs	  of	  their	  
errors	   or	   could	   devise	   a	   strategy	   to	   exploit	   the	   error	   to	   make	   higher	   profits.	   The	   latter	  
strategy	  will	  almost	  always	  be	  more	  profitable.	  As	  a	  rule	  it	  is	  easier	  to	  cater	  to	  biases	  than	  to	  
eradicate	  them.	  DellaVigna	  and	  Malmendier	  (2006)	  provide	  an	  instructive	  example	  in	  their	  
article	  “Paying	  Not	  to	  Go	  to	  the	  Gym.”	  The	  authors	  study	  the	  usage	  of	  customers	  of	  three	  
gyms	  that	  offer	  members	  the	  choice	  of	  paying	  $70	  a	  month	  for	  unlimited	  usage,	  or	  a	  package	  
of	  10	  entry	  tickets	  for	  $100.	  They	  find	  that	  the	  members	  paying	  the	  monthly	  fee	  go	  to	  the	  
gym	  an	  average	  of	  4.3	  times	  per	  month,	  implying	  an	  average	  cost	  of	  over	  $17	  per	  visit.	  
Obviously	   the	   typical	   monthly	   members	   have	   an	   arbitrage	   opportunity	   available.	   Why	  
pay	  $17	  a	  visit	  when	  they	  could	  be	  paying	  $10?	  One	  possible	  explanation	  for	  this	  behavior	  is	  
that	  customers	  understand	  that	  they	  are	  affected	  by	  sunk	  costs	  (whether	  or	  not	  they	  realize	  
it	   is	   a	   fallacy)	   and	   are	   strategically	   using	   the	   membership	   fee	   as	   a	   (rather	   ineffective)	  
commitment	   device	   to	   try	   to	   induce	   more	   frequent	   gym	   usage.	   Let’s	   suppose	   that	  
explanation	   is	   correct.	   What	   could	   a	   competing	   gym	   do	   to	   both	   make	   more	   money	   and	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

reduce	  or	  eliminate	  the	  less	  than	  fully	  rational	  behavior	  of	  their	  clients?	  It	  would	  certainly	  
not	   be	   a	   great	   strategy	   to	   explain	   to	   customers	   that	   they	   could	   save	   a	   lot	   of	   money	   by	  
switching	  to	  the	  10-­‐ticket	  package.	  Not	  only	  would	  the	  gym	  be	  losing	  money	  on	  a	  per	  visit	  
basis,	   but	   they	   would	   also	   forego	   the	   payments	   from	   infrequent	   gym	   users	   who	  
procrastinate	  about	  quitting.	  The	  average	  person	  who	  quits	  has	  not	  been	  to	  the	  gym	  in	  2.3	  
months.	  So	  if	  competing	  gyms	  can’t	  make	  money	  by	  turning	  them	  into	  Econs,	  who	  can?	  I	  
suppose	   DellaVigna	   and	   Malmendier	   could	   have	   started	   a	   service	   convincing	   people	   to	  
switch	   to	   paying	   by	   the	   visit,	   but	   I	   think	   they	   made	   a	   wise	   career	   choice	   in	   selecting	  
academia	  over	  personal	  finance	  consulting.	  
The	   same	   analysis	   applies	   to	   the	   recent	   financial	   crisis.	   Many	   homeowners	   took	   out	  
mortgages	   with	   initial	   low	   “teaser	   rates.”	   Once	   the	   rates	   reset,	   some	   homeowners	   found	  
they	  were	  unable	  to	  pay	  their	  mortgage	  payments	  unless	  home	  prices	  continued	  to	  go	  up	  
and	   mortgage	   refinancing	   remained	   available	   at	   low	   interest.	   The	   mortgage	   lenders	   who	  
initiated	  such	  mortgages	  and	  then	  immediately	  sold	  the	  loans	  to	  be	  securitized	  made	  lots	  of	  
money	  while	  it	  lasted,	  but	  the	  subsequent	  financial	  crisis	  was	  painful	  to	  nearly	  everyone.	  
Let’s	  assume	  that	  at	  least	  some	  of	  these	  mortgage	  borrowers	  were	  fooled	  by	  fast-­‐talking	  
mortgage	  brokers.4	  How	  would	  the	  market	  solve	  this	  problem?	  No	  one	  has	  ever	  gotten	  rich	  
convincing	  people	  not	  to	  take	  out	  unwise	  mortgages.	  
Similarly	  if	  people	  fail	  to	  follow	  the	  dictates	  of	  the	  life-­‐cycle	  hypothesis	  and	  fail	  to	  save	  
adequately	  for	  retirement,	  how	  is	  the	  market	  going	  to	  help	  them?	  Yes,	  there	  are	  firms	  selling	  
mutual	   funds	   but	   they	   are	   competing	   with	   other	   firms	   selling	   fast	   cars,	   big	   screen	  
televisions,	  and	  exotic	  vacations.	  Who	  is	  going	  to	  win	  that	  battle?	  The	  bottom	  line	  is	  there	  is	  
no	  magic	  market	  potion	  that	  miraculously	  turns	  Humans	  into	  Econs;	  in	  fact,	  the	  opposite	  
pattern	  is	  more	  likely	  to	  occur,	  namely	  that	  markets	  will	  exacerbate	  behavioral	  biases	  by	  
catering	  to	  those	  preferences.	  
The	  conclusion	  one	  should	  reach	  from	  this	  section	  is	  that	  the	  explainawaytions	  are	  not	  a	  
good	  excuse	  to	  presume	  that	  agents	  will	  behave	  as	  if	  they	  were	  Econs.	  Instead	  we	  need	  to	  
follow	   Milton	   Friedman’s	   advice	   and	   evaluate	   theories	   based	   on	   the	   quality	   of	   their	  
predictions,	  and,	  if	  necessary,	  modify	  some	  of	  our	  theories.	  
III.	   Financial	  Markets5	  
A	   good	   place	   to	   start	   in	   an	   evaluation	   of	   the	   potential	   importance	   of	   less-­‐than-­‐fully-­‐
rational	  agents	  is	  financial	  markets.	  I	  say	  this	  because	  financial	  markets	  have	  the	  features	  
that	   should	   make	   it	   hardest	   to	   find	   evidence	   of	   misbehavior.	   These	   markets	   have	   low	  
transaction	  costs,	  high	  stakes,	  lots	  of	  competition	  (except	  perhaps	  in	  some	  banking	  sectors)	  
and	  crucially,	  the	  ability	  to	  sell	  short.	  It	  is	  short	  selling	  that	  allows	  for	  the	  possibility	  that	  
even	  if	  most	  investors	  are	  fools,	  the	  activities	  of	  “smart	  money”	  arbitrageurs	  can	  assure	  that	  
markets	   behave	   “as	   if”	   everyone	   were	   smart.	   This	   is	   the	   intellectual	   underpinning	   of	   the	  
efficient	  market	  hypothesis	  (EMH).	  
The	  efficient	  market	  hypothesis	  really	  has	  two	  distinct	  components.	  The	  first,	  what	  I	  call	  
the	  “no	  free	  lunch”	  provision,	  is	  that	  it	  is	  not	  possible	  to	  “beat	  the	  market”	  on	  a	  properly	  
risk-­‐adjusted	  basis.	  There	  is	  an	  enormous	  literature	  devoted	  to	  testing	  this	  hypothesis,	  with	  
many	  arguments	  on	  each	  side.	  The	  difficulty	  in	  evaluating	  competing	  claims	  is	  in	  agreeing	  
on	  the	  way	  to	  account	  for	  risk.	  For	  example,	  there	  is	  widespread	  agreement	  in	  the	  literature	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4 Of	  course	  some	  borrowers	  might	  have	  been	  planning	  all	  along	  to	  default	  and	  live	  rent	  free	  for	  as	  long	  as	  possible	  before	  
walking	  away.	  They	  were	  then	  acting	  like	  Econs. 	  
	  
5 This	  section	  draws	  on	  Barberis	  and	  Thaler	  (2003). 	  
	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

that	   a	   strategy	   of	   buying	   “value	   stocks,”	   for	   example	   those	   with	   low	   ratios	   of	   price	   to	  
earnings	  or	  book	  value,	  earns	  higher	  returns	  than	  buying	  “growth	  stocks,”	  which	  have	  high	  
price-­‐earnings	   ratios.	   However,	   there	   is	   a	   debate	   about	   the	   explanation	   for	   these	   excess	  
returns.	  Behavioralists	  (for	  example	  De	  Bondt	  and	  Thaler	  1985,	  1987;	  Lakonishok,	  Shleifer,	  
and	  Vishny	  1994)	  argue	  that	  the	  excess	  returns	  reflect	  mispricing	  of	  some	  sort.	  On	  the	  other	  
side,	  efficient	  market	  advocates	  such	  as	  Fama	  and	  French	  (1993)	  argue	  that	  the	  high	  returns	  
to	  value	  stocks	  occur	  because	  those	  stocks	  are	  risky.	  Although	  it	  would	  not	  be	  right	  to	  say	  
that	  this	  argument	  has	  been	  settled	  to	  everyone’s	  satisfaction,	  I	  do	  think	  that	  no	  one	  has	  
been	  able	  to	  identify	  a	  specific	  way	  in	  which	  value	  stocks	  are	  riskier	  than	  growth	  stocks.	  
(For	  example,	  value	  stocks	  tend	  to	  have	  lower	  betas,	  the	  traditional	  measure	  of	  risk	  in	  the	  
Capital	  Asset	  Pricing	  Model.)	  Still,	  while	  academics	  debate	  about	  the	  correct	  interpretation	  
of	  these	  empirical	  results,	  one	  important	  fact	  first	  documented	  in	  Jensen’s	  (1968)	  PhD	  thesis	  
remains	  true:	  the	  active	  mutual	  fund	  industry	  on	  average	  does	  not	  beat	  the	  market.	  
So	  from	  the	  point	  of	  view	  of	  an	  investor,	  this	  aspect	  of	  the	  efficient	  market	  hypothesis	  can	  
safely	  be	  considered	  to	  be	  at	  least	  approximately	  true.	  Nevertheless,	  it	  is	  important	  not	  to	  
misinterpret	  this	  finding.	  The	  lack	  of	  predictability	  in	  stock	  market	  returns	  does	  not	  imply	  
that	  stock	  market	  prices	  are	  “correct.”	  This	  is	  the	  second	  aspect	  of	  the	  EMH,	  what	  I	  call	  the	  
“price	   is	   right”	   component.	   The	   inference	   that	   unpredictability	   implies	   rational	   prices	   is	  
what	  Shiller	  (1984,	  p.	  459)	  once	  called	  “one	  of	  the	  most	  remarkable	  errors	  in	  the	  history	  of	  
economic	  thought.”	  It	  is	  an	  error	  because	  just	  as	  the	  path	  of	  a	  toddler	  running	  around	  on	  a	  
playground	  might	  be	  completely	  unpredictable,	  the	  path	  is	  also	  not	  likely	  to	  be	  the	  result	  of	  
maximizing	  some	  well-­‐formed	  objective	  function	  (other	  than	  having	  fun).	  
The	  price	  is	  right	  component	  of	  the	  EMH	  is,	  in	  my	  opinion,	  by	  far	  the	  more	  important	  of	  
the	  two	  ingredients	  of	  the	  theory.	  It	  is	  important	  because	  if	  prices	  are	  “wrong”	  then	  capital	  
markets	   are	   not	   doing	   an	   efficient	   job	   of	   allocating	   resources.6	  The	   problem	   has	   been	   to	  
come	  up	  with	  a	  convincing	  test	  of	  this	  part	  of	  the	  theory	  because	  the	  intrinsic	  value	  of	  a	  
security	  is	  normally	  unknowable.	  If	  the	  price	  of	  Apple	  Inc.	  were	  too	  high	  or	  too	  low,	  how	  
would	  we	  know?	  It	  turns	  out	  that	  there	  are	  classes	  of	  assets	  for	  which	  we	  can	  say	  something	  
definitive,	  namely	  those	  for	  which	  we	  can	  use	  the	  law	  of	  one	  price	  as	  a	  test.	  Although	  we	  
don’t	   know	   the	   rational	   price	   of	   Apple,	   we	   can	   say	   for	   sure	   that	   odd-­‐numbered	   share	  
certificates	  (if	  such	  things	  still	  exist)	  should	  sell	  for	  the	  same	  price	  as	  even-­‐numbered	  shares.	  
I	  have	  explored	  several	  such	  examples	  in	  work	  with	  Owen	  Lamont,7	  and	  he	  recently	  told	  me	  
about	  another	  one	  that	  I	  will	  describe	  here.	  
One	  type	  of	  security	  that	  has	  provided	  a	  fruitful	  source	  of	  tests	  of	  the	  law	  of	  one	  price	  is	  
closed-­‐end	  mutual	  funds.	  Unlike	  their	  open-­‐ended	  cousins,	  which	  accept	  new	  investments	  
that	  are	  valued	  at	  the	  net	  asset	  value	  of	  the	  securities	  held	  by	  the	  fund,	  and	  then	  redeem	  
withdrawals	   the	   same	   way,	   closed-­‐end	   funds	   are,	   as	   their	   name	   suggests,	   closed	   to	   new	  
investors.	  Rather,	  when	  the	  fund	  starts,	  a	  certain	  amount	  of	  money	  is	  raised	  and	  invested,	  
and	  then	  the	  shares	  in	  the	  fund	  trade	  on	  organized	  markets	  such	  as	  the	  New	  York	  Stock	  
Exchange.	  The	  curious	  fact	  about	  closed-­‐end	  funds,	  noted	  early	  on	  by	  Graham	  (1949)	  among	  
others,	   is	   that	   the	   price	   of	   the	   shares	   is	   not	   always	   equal	   to	   the	   net	   asset	   value	   of	   the	  
underlying	  securities.	  Funds	  typically	  sell	  at	  discounts	  of	  10–15	  percent,	  but	  sometimes	  sell	  
at	  substantial	  premia.	  This	  is	  the	  story	  of	  one	  such	  fund.	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6 Which,	  of	  course,	  is	  not	  to	  say	  that	  some	  other	  system	  would	  do	  better. 	  
	  
7 See	  Lamont	  and	  Thaler	  (2003a,	  2003b). 	  
	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

The	  particular	  fund	  I	  want	  to	  highlight	  here	  happens	  to	  have	  the	  ticker	  symbol	  CUBA.	  
Founded	   in	   1994,	   its	   official	   name	   is	   the	   Herzfeld	   Caribbean	   Basin	   Fund,	   which	   has	  
69 percent	   of	   its	   holdings	   in	   US	   stocks	   with	   the	   rest	   in	   foreign	   stocks,	   chiefly	   Mexican.	   It	  
gave	  itself	  the	  ticker	  “CUBA”	  despite	  the	  fact	  that	  it	  owns	  no	  Cuban	  securities	  nor	  has	  it	  been	  
legal	  for	  any	  US	  company	  to	  do	  business	  in	  Cuba	  since	  1960	  (although	  that	  may	  change	  at	  
some	   point).	   The	   legal	   proviso,	   plus	   the	   fact	   that	   there	   are	   no	   traded	   securities	   in	   Cuba,	  
means	  that	  the	  fund	  has	  no	  financial	  interest	  in	  the	  country	  with	  which	  it	  shares	  a	  name.	  
Historically,	  the	  CUBA	  fund	  traded	  at	  a	  10–15	  percent	  discount	  to	  Net	  Asset	  Value.	  
Figure	   1	   plots	   both	   the	   share	   price	   and	   net	   asset	   value	   for	   the	   CUBA	   fund	   for	   a	   time	  
period	  beginning	  in	  September	  2014.	  For	  the	  first	  few	  months	  we	  can	  see	  that	  the	  share	  
price	   is	   trading	   in	   the	   normal	   10–15	   percent	   discount	   range.	   Then	   something	   abruptly	  
happens	  on	  December	  18,	  2014.	  Although	  the	  net	  asset	  value	  of	  the	  fund	  barely	  moves,	  the	  
price	   of	   the	   shares	   jumped	   to	   a	   70	   percent	   premium.	   Whereas	   it	   had	   previously	   been	  
possible	  to	  buy	  $100	  worth	  of	  Caribbean	  assets	  for	  just	  $90,	  the	  next	  day	  those	  assets	  cost	  
$170!	  As	  readers	  have	  probably	  guessed,	  this	  price	  jump	  coincided	  with	  President	  Obama’s	  
announcement	  of	  his	  intention	  to	  relax	  the	  United	  States’	  diplomatic	  relations	  with	  Cuba.	  
Although	  the	  value	  of	  the	  assets	  in	  the	  fund	  remained	  stable,	  the	  substantial	  premium	  lasted	  
for	  several	  months,	  finally	  disappearing	  about	  a	  year	  later.	  
This	  example	  and	  others	  like	  it	  show	  that	  prices	  can	  diverge	  significantly	  from	  intrinsic	  
value,	  even	  when	  intrinsic	  value	  is	  easily	  measured	  and	  reported	  daily.	  What	  then	  should	  
we	  think	  about	  broader	  market	  indices?	  Can	  they	  also	  get	  out	  of	  whack?	  Certainly,	  the	  run-­‐
up	  of	  technology	  stocks	  in	  the	  late	  1990s	  looked	  like	  a	  bubble	  at	  the	  time,	  with	  stocks	  selling	  
for	  very	  high	  multiples	  of	  earnings	  (or	  sales	  for	  those	  without	  profits),	  and	  it	  was	  followed	  
by	   a	   decline	   in	   prices	   of	   more	   than	   two	   thirds	   in	   the	   NASDAQ	   index.	   We	   experienced	   a	  
similar	  pattern	  in	  the	  housing	  boom	  in	  the	  mid	  2000s,	  especially	  in	  some	  cities	  such	  as	  Las	  
$0.00 
$2.00 
$4.00 
$6.00 
$8.00 
$10.00 
$12.00 
$14.00 
$16.00 
Closing price ($)
Price
NAV
+70%
−10%
Dec 18 
May 2014
Jul 2014
Sep 2014
Nov 2014
Jan 2015
Mar 2015
May 2015
Jul 2015
Sep 2015
Nov 2015
Jan 2016
Mar 2016
Figure	  1.	  Price	  and	  Net	  Asset	  Value	  for	  CUBA	  Fund	  
Note:	  On	  December	  18,	  2014,	  President	  Obama	  announced	  he	  was	  going	  to	  lift	  
several	  restrictions	  against	  Cuba.	  
Source:	  Bloomberg	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

Vegas	  and	  Phoenix.	  Prices	  sharply	  diverged	  from	  their	  long-­‐term	  trend	  of	  selling	  for	  roughly	  
20	  times	  rental	  prices,	  only	  to	  fall	  back	  to	  the	  long-­‐term	  trend.	  Because	  of	  the	  various	  forms	  
of	  leverage	  involved,	  this	  rise	  and	  fall	  in	  prices	  helped	  create	  the	  global	  Great	  Recession.	  
The	   difference	   between	   the	   CUBA	   example	   and	   these	   much	   larger	   bubbles	   is	   that	   it	   is	  
impossible	  to	  prove	  that	  prices	  in	  the	  latter	  were	  ever	  wrong.	  There	  is	  no	  clear	  smoking	  gun.	  
But	   it	   certainly	   feels	   like	   asset	   prices	   can	   diverge	   significantly	   from	   fundamental	   value.	  
Perhaps	   we	   should	   adopt	   the	   definition	   of	   market	   efficiency	   proposed	   by	   Fischer	   Black	  
(1986)	   in	   his	   presidential	   address	   to	   the	   American	   Finance	   Association,	   which	   had	   the	  
intriguing	   one	   word	   title	   “Noise.”	   Black	   (1986, p.	   553)	   says	   “we	   might	   define	   an	   efficient	  
market	  as	  one	  in	  which	  price	  is	  within	  a	  factor	  of	  two	  of	  value,	  i.e.,	  the	  price	  is	  more	  than	  
half	  of	  value	  and	  less	  than	  twice	  value.	  The	  factor	  of	  two	  is	  arbitrary,	  of	  course.	  Intuitively,	  
though,	  it	  seems	  reasonable	  to	  me,	  in	  light	  of	  sources	  of	  uncertainty	  about	  value	  and	  the	  
strength	  of	  the	  forces	  tending	  to	  cause	  price	  to	  return	  to	  value.	  By	  this	  definition,	  I	  think	  
almost	  all	  markets	  are	  efficient	  almost	  all	  the	  time.	  ‘Almost	  all’	  means	  at	  least	  90 percent.”	  
One	  can	  quibble	  over	  various	  aspects	  of	  Black’s	  definition	  but	  it	  seems	  about	  right	  to	  me,	  
and	  had	  Black	  lived	  to	  see	  the	  tech	  bubble	  of	  the	  90s	  he	  might	  have	  revised	  his	  number	  up	  
to	  three.	  I	  would	  like	  to	  make	  two	  points	  about	  this.	  The	  first	  is	  that	  the	  efficient	  market	  
hypothesis	  has	  been	  a	  highly	  useful,	  indeed	  essential	  concept	  in	  the	  history	  of	  research	  on	  
financial	   markets.	   In	   fact,	   without	   the	   EMH	   there	   would	   have	   been	   no	   benchmark	   with	  
which	  to	  compare	  anomalous	  findings.	  The	  only	  danger	  created	  by	  the	  concept	  of	  the	  EMH	  
is	   if	   people,	   especially	   policymakers,	   consider	   it	   to	   be	   true.	   If	   policymakers	   think	   that	  
bubbles	  are	  impossible,	  then	  they	  may	  fail	  to	  take	  appropriate	  steps	  to	  dampen	  them.	  For	  
example,	  I	  think	  it	  would	  have	  been	  appropriate	  to	  raise	  mortgage-­‐lending	  requirements	  in	  
cities	  where	  price	  to	  rental	  ratios	  seemed	  most	  frothy.	  Instead,	  this	  was	  a	  period	  in	  which	  
lending	  requirements	  were	  unusually	  lax.	  
There	   is	   a	   broader	   point	   to	   make.	   For	   lots	   of	   reasons	   we	   might	   expect	   that	   financial	  
markets	   are	   the	   most	   efficient	   of	   all	   markets.	   They	   are	   the	   only	   markets	   where	   it	   is	  
generally	  possible	  to	  cheaply	  sell	  short,	  an	  essential	  feature	  if	  we	  expect	  prices	  to	  be	  “right.”	  
Yet	  if	  financial	  markets	  can	  be	  off	  by	  a	  factor	  of	  two,	  how	  much	  confidence	  should	  we	  have	  
that	   prices	   in	   other	   markets	   are	   good	   measures	   of	   value,	   where	   there	   are	   no	   realistic	  
arbitrage	  opportunities?	  
To	  give	  just	  one	  example,	  consider	  labor	  markets.	  There	  has	  been	  considerable	  attention	  
paid	   in	   recent	   years	   to	   the	   growing	   inequality	   in	   incomes	   and	   wealth	   around	   the	   world	  
(Piketty	   2014;	   Atkinson,	   Piketty,	   and	   Saez	   2011).	   Although	   there	   has	   been	   much	   debate	  
about	   the	   cause	   of	   this	   trend,	   most	   of	   the	   discussion	   within	   economics	   is	   based	   on	   the	  
presumption	   that	   differences	   in	   income	   reflect	   differences	   in	   productivity.	   Is	   that	  
presumption	  warranted?	  If	  stock	  prices	  can	  be	  off	  by	  a	  factor	  of	  two,	  might	  not	  that	  be	  true	  
for	  workers,	  from	  hamburger	  flippers	  to	  CEOs?	  
There	  is	  reason	  for	  skepticism	  about	  that	  presumption	  from	  the	  bottom	  to	  the	  top	  of	  the	  
income	  ladder.	  At	  the	  lower	  end	  of	  the	  wage	  distribution	  there	  has	  been	  a	  long	  literature	  
begun	   by	   Slichter	   (1950)	   documenting	   odd	   inter-­‐industry	   wage	   differentials.	   Simply	   put,	  
some	  industries	  pay	  more	  than	  others,	  and	  this	  applies	  to	  clerical	  workers	  and	  janitors	  as	  
well	   as	   higher	   paid	   executives.	   Important	   papers	   by	   Krueger	   and	   Summers	   (1988)	   and	  
Dickens	   and	   Katz	   (1986)	   reignited	   this	   literature	   summarized	   in	   Thaler	   (1989).	   Card,	  
Heining,	   and	   Kline	   (2013)	   have	   recently	   documented	   similar	   findings	   in	   Germany	   using	  
panel	  data	  that	  allow	  for	  individual	  fixed	  effects.	  They	  find	  that	  when	  workers	  move	  from	  a	  
bottom	   quartile	   paying	   industry	   to	   a	   top	   quartile	   industry	   their	   wages	   jump,	   and	   the	  
opposite	  thing	  happens	  when	  workers	  move	  from	  a	  high	  paying	  industry	  to	  a	  low	  one.	  It	  
seems	  implausible	  that	  these	  workers	  become	  significantly	  more	  or	  less	  productive	  simply	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

by	  changing	  industries.	  
At	  the	  other	  end	  of	  the	  spectrum,	  the	  ratio	  of	  CEO	  pay	  to	  that	  of	  the	  average	  worker	  has	  
skyrocketed	  in	  the	  past	  few	  decades.	  In	  1965	  for	  large	  firms	  based	  in	  the	  United	  States	  this	  
ratio	   was	   20;	   by	   2014	   it	   was	   over	   300,	   more	   than	   twice	   the	   ratio	   in	   any	   other	   country	  
(Mishel	  and	  Davis	  2015).	  Of	  course	  some	  economists	  argue	  that	  this	  rise	  simply	  reflects	  the	  
growing	   productivity	   of	   the	   CEOs	   (e.g.,	   Kaplan,	   Klebanov,	   and	   Sorensen	   2012)	   but	   how	  
confident	   should	   we	   be	   in	   this	   assessment?	   CEO	   pay	   is	   usually	   set	   by	   the	   compensation	  
committees	  of	  boards	  of	  directors	  that	  rely	  on	  consultants	  who	  base	  their	  recommendations	  
in	  part	  on	  the	  pay	  of	  other	  CEOs.	  This	  kind	  of	  recursive,	  self-­‐fulfilling	  process	  is	  not	  one	  that	  
generates	  high	  confidence	  that	  pay	  and	  performance	  are	  highly	  correlated.	  Of	  course	  there	  
is	  no	  way	  to	  settle	  this	  argument.	  Rather,	  I	  just	  want	  to	  repeat	  my	  question.	  If	  stock	  prices	  
can	  be	  off	  by	  a	  factor	  of	  two,	  why	  should	  we	  be	  confident	  that	  other	  markets	  do	  not	  diverge	  
by	  that	  much,	  or	  more?	  
IV.	   One	  Theory,	  Two	  Tasks	  
The	   conclusion	   I	   reach	   from	   research	   in	   behavioral	   finance	   is	   that	   even	   these	   most	  
efficient	  of	  markets	  often	  lead	  to	  empirical	  results	  that	  are	  inconsistent	  with	  theories	  based	  
on	  rational	  investors	  making	  choices	  in	  markets	  with	  tiny	  transaction	  costs.	  In	  other	  words,	  
the	  results	  we	  obtain	  are	  not	  consistent	  with	  the	  hypothesis	  that	  investors	  behave	  “as	  if”	  
they	  were	  rational.	  And	  there	  should	  be	  even	  greater	  suspicion	  that	  such	  models	  will	  make	  
good	  predictions	  in	  other	  markets	  where	  arbitrage	  is	  impossible.	  So	  what	  should	  happen	  to	  
economic	  theory?	  
The	  problem	  is	  that	  we	  are	  asking	  our	  theories	  to	  do	  two	  different	  tasks.	  The	  first	  is	  to	  
solve	   for	   optimal	   solutions	   to	   problems,	   the	   other	   is	   to	   describe	   how	   Humans	   actually	  
choose.	   Of	   course	   in	   a	   world	   consisting	   only	   of	   Econs	   there	   would	   be	   no	   need	   for	   two	  
different	  kinds	  of	  models.	  Economic	  agents	  would	  have	  the	  courtesy	  to	  make	  the	  optimal	  
choices	  that	  the	  model	  determines	  are	  best	  (at	  least	  on	  average).	  But	  we	  are	  far	  from	  that	  
world:	  We	  Humans	  struggle	  both	  to	  determine	  what	  the	  best	  choice	  would	  be	  and	  then	  to	  
have	   enough	   willpower	   to	   implement	   that	   choice,	   especially	   if	   it	   requires	   delay	   of	  
gratification.	  So	  we	  need	  descriptive	  economic	  theories.	  
The	  first	  and	  most	  successful	  such	  theory	  is	  Kahneman	  and	  Tverksy’s	  (1979)	  prospect	  
theory,	   which	   has	   had	   an	   enormous	   impact	   on	   both	   economics	   and	   social	   science	   more	  
generally.8	  Beyond	  the	  insights	  of	  the	  model	  itself,	  prospect	  theory	  provides	  a	  template	  for	  
the	  new	  class	  of	  theories	  we	  need.	  Expected	  utility	  theory	  remains	  the	  gold	  standard	  for	  
how	   decisions	   should	   be	   made	   in	   the	   face	   of	   risk.	   Prospect	   theory	   is	   meant	   to	   be	   a	  
complement	  to	  expected	  utility	  theory,	  which	  tell	  us	  how	  people	  actually	  make	  such	  choices.	  
Using	   one	   theory	   for	   both	   purposes	   makes	   no	   more	   sense	   then	   using	   a	   hammer	   both	   to	  
pound	  nails	  and	  to	  apply	  paint.	  
Some	  economists	  might	  think	  that	  without	  optimization	  there	  can	  be	  no	  theory,	  but	  in	  a	  
cogent	  essay	  Arrow	  (1986)	  rejected	  this	  idea.	  “Let	  me	  dismiss	  a	  point	  of	  view	  that	  is	  perhaps	  
not	  always	  articulated	  but	  seems	  implicit	  in	  many	  writings.	  It	  seems	  to	  be	  asserted	  that	  a	  
theory	   of	   the	   economy	   must	   be	   based	   on	   rationality,	   as	   a	   matter	   of	   principle.	   Otherwise	  
there	  can	  be	  no	  theory.”	  Arrow	  noted	  that	  there	  could	  be	  many	  rigorous,	  formal	  theories	  
based	  on	  behavior	  that	  economists	  would	  not	  be	  willing	  to	  call	  rational.	  He	  also	  pointed	  out	  
the	   inconsistency	   of	   an	   economic	   theorist	   who	   toils	   for	   months	   to	   derive	   the	   optimal	  
solution	  to	  some	  complex	  economic	  problem	  and	  then	  blithely	  assumes	  that	  the	  agents	  in	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8 According	  to	  Google	  Scholar	  the	  paper	  has	  been	  cited	  nearly	  40,000	  times. 	  
	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

his	  model	  behave	  as	  if	  they	  are	  naturally	  capable	  of	  solving	  the	  same	  problem.	  “We	  have	  the	  
curious	   situation	   that	   scientific	   analysis	   imputes	   scientific	   behavior	   to	   its	   subjects.	   This	  
need	  not	  be	  a	  contradiction,	  but	  it	  does	  seem	  to	  lead	  to	  an	  infinite	  regress.”	  
This	  is	  not	  the	  place,	  and	  I	  am	  not	  the	  person,	  to	  present	  a	  detailed	  roadmap	  of	  what	  a	  
behavioral	  approach	  to	  economic	  theory	  should	  be,	  but	  perhaps	  a	  few	  brief	  thoughts	  are	  
appropriate.	   The	   first	   is	   that	   behavioral	   economic	   theories	   (or	   any	   descriptive	   theories)	  
must	  abandon	  the	  inductive	  reasoning	  that	  is	  the	  core	  of	  neoclassical	  theories	  and	  instead	  
adopt	   a	   deductive	   approach	   in	   which	   hypotheses	   and	   assumptions	   are	   based	   on	  
observations	  about	  human	  behavior.	  In	  other	  words,	  behavioral	  economic	  theory	  must	  be	  
evidence-­‐based	   theory.	   The	   evidence	   upon	   which	   these	   theories	   can	   be	   based	   can	   come	  
from	  psychology	  or	  other	  social	  sciences	  or	  it	  can	  be	  homemade.	  Some	  might	  worry	  about	  
basing	   theories	   on	   empirical	   observation,	   but	   this	   methodology	   has	   a	   rich	   tradition	   in	  
science.	  The	  Copernican	  revolution,	  which	  placed	  the	  sun	  at	  the	  center	  of	  our	  solar	  system	  
rather	  than	  the	  earth,	  was	  based	  on	  data	  regarding	  the	  movement	  of	  the	  planets,	  not	  on	  
some	  first	  principles.	  
A	  second	  general	  point	  is	  that	  we	  should	  not	  expect	  some	  new	  grand	  behavioral	  theory	  to	  
emerge	  to	  replace	  the	  neoclassical	  paradigm.	  We	  already	  have	  a	  grand	  theory	  and	  it	  does	  a	  
really	   good	   job	   of	   characterizing	   how	   optimal	   choices	   and	   equilibrium	   concepts	   work.	  
Behavioral	  theories	  will	  be	  more	  like	  engineering,	  a	  set	  of	  practical	  enhancements	  that	  lead	  
to	  better	  predictions	  about	  behavior.	  So	  far,	  most	  of	  these	  behavioral	  enhancements	  focus	  
on	  two	  broad	  topics:	  preferences	  and	  beliefs.	  
A.	  Behavioral	  Preferences	  
Prospect	  theory	  is	  a	  good	  illustration	  of	  a	  model	  based	  on	  assumptions	  about	  preferences	  
that	   differ	   from	   the	   ones	   used	   to	   derive	   expected	   utility	   theory.	   Specifically,	   most	   of	  
prospect	   theory’s	   predictive	   power	   comes	   from	   three	   crucial	   assumptions	   about	  
preferences.	  First,	  utility	  is	  derived	  from	  changes	  in	  wealth	  relative	  to	  some	  reference	  point,	  
rather	  than	  levels	  of	  wealth,	  as	  is	  usually	  assumed	  in	  theories	  based	  on	  expected	  utility.9	  
Second,	  the	  “value	  function”	  which	  translates	  perceived	  changes	  in	  wealth	  into	  utility,	  has	  a	  
kink	  at	  the	  origin,	  with	  losses	  weighed	  more	  heavily	  than	  gains—i.e.,	  “loss	  aversion.”	  Third,	  
decision	  weights	  are	  a	  function	  of	  probabilities	  ∏(p)	  where	  ∏(p) ≠ p.	  These	  aspects	  of	  the	  
theory	   were	   inferred	   from	   studying	   the	   choices	   subjects	   made	   when	   asked	   to	   choose	  
between	  gambles.	  
Two	  other	  research	  streams	  have	  been	  based	  on	  models	  of	  preferences.	  The	  first	  topic	  is	  
intertemporal	   choice.	   As	   revealed	   by	   the	   quotations	   from	   Smith,	   Pigou,	   and	   Fisher	  
mentioned	  earlier	  in	  this	  essay,	  economists	  have	  long	  worried	  that	  people	  display	  what	  we	  
now	  call	  “present	  biased”	  preferences,	  meaning	  that	  the	  discount	  rate	  between	  “now”	  and	  
“later”	  is	  much	  higher	  than	  between	  “later”	  and	  “even	  later.”	  Such	  preferences	  can	  lead	  to	  
time-­‐inconsistent	   behavior	   since	   we	   expect	   to	   be	   patient	   in	   choosing	   between	   a	   smaller	  
reward	  in	  a	  year	  and	  a	  larger	  reward	  in	  a	  year	  plus	  a	  week,	  but	  when	  the	  year	  passes	  and	  
the	  smaller	  reward	  is	  available	  “now,”	  we	  submit	  to	  temptation.	  If	  people	  realize	  they	  have	  
such	   preferences,	   they	   may	   choose	   to	   commit	   themselves	   now	   to	   choosing	   the	   larger	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9 It	  is	  true	  that	  von	  Neumann	  and	  Morgenstern	  do	  not	  specify	  what	  the	  arguments	  are	  in	  their	  utility	  function,	  and	  some	  
have	  argued	  that	  one	  could	  simply	  revise	  expected	  utility	  to	  be	  a	  function	  of	  income	  rather	  than	  wealth	  to	  incorporate	  this	  
feature.	  What	  this	  misses	  is	  that	  defining	  “income”	  depends	  on	  a	  theory	  of	  mental	  accounting	  in	  order	  to	  know	  over	  what	  time	  
horizon	  income	  is	  being	  measured.	  If	  “income”	  is	  lifetime	  income	  then	  it	  is	  the	  same	  as	  wealth.	  But	  if	  it	  is	  daily	  income	  then	  one	  
gets	  very	  different	  predictions.	  See,	  for	  example,	  the	  controversial	  literature	  on	  taxi	  cab	  driver	  labor	  supply	  (Camerer	  et	  al.	  
1997;	  Crawford	  and	  Meng	  2011;	  Farber	  2015). 	  
	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

delayed	  reward,	  a	  strategy	  they	  will	  later	  regret	  (at	  least	  for	  a	  week	  or	  so).	  
Two	  kinds	  of	  models	  have	  been	  proposed	  to	  deal	  with	  these	  aberrant	  preferences.	  One	  is	  
based	   on	   a	   two-­‐self	   (or	   “two-­‐system”)	   approach	   that	   is	   meant	   to	   capture	   the	   inherent	  
conflict	  that	  defines	  self-­‐control	  problems.	  In	  the	  version	  of	  this	  type	  of	  model	  that	  Hersh	  
Shefrin	  and	  I	  favor	  (Thaler	  and	  Shefrin	  1981)	  individuals	  are	  assumed	  to	  have	  a	  long-­‐sighted	  
“planner”	   and	   myopic	   “doer”	   that	   interact	   in	   a	   model	   similar	   to	   agency	   models	   of	  
organizations.	   Schelling	   (1984)	   and	   Fudenberg	   and	   Levine	   (2006)	   also	   proposed	   two-­‐self	  
models	  to	  characterize	  this	  behavior.	  
Although	  these	  two-­‐self	  models	  provide	  more	  psychological	  texture,	  they	  have	  not	  been	  
as	  popular	  among	  economic	  theorists	  as	  the	  simpler	  and	  more	  tractable	  “beta-­‐delta”	  model	  
originally	  proposed	  by	  Strotz	  (1955)	  and	  then	  refined	  by	  Laibson	  (1997)	  and	  O’Donoghue	  
and	  Rabin	  (1999).	  In	  these	  models	  delta	  is	  the	  standard	  exponential	  discount	  rate	  and	  beta	  
measures	  short-­‐term	  impatience.	  The	  standard	  model	  is	  just	  the	  special	  case	  in	  which	  beta	  
is	   1.0.	   The	   beta-­‐delta	   model	   is	   a	   good	   example	   of	   what	   Rabin	   (2013)	   calls	   PEEMs,	   which	  
stands	   for	   “portable	   extensions	   of	   existing	   models.”	   The	  ease	  with	  which	  economists	  can	  
incorporate	  such	  models	  into	  an	  otherwise	  standard	  analysis	  has	  obvious	  appeal.	  
Along	  with	  intertemporal	  choice,	  the	  important	  aspect	  of	  preferences	  that	  has	  received	  a	  
lot	  of	  attention	  from	  behavioral	  economic	  theorists	  is	  “other-­‐regarding	  preferences.”	  These	  
models	  were	  all	  stimulated	  by	  empirical	  findings	  showing	  that	  humans	  are	  not	  completely	  
selfish,	  even	  to	  strangers.	  For	  example,	  in	  one-­‐shot	  prisoners’	  dilemma	  games	  about	  40–50	  
percent	   of	   subjects	   cooperate,	   both	   in	   laboratory	   experiments	   and	   even	   in	   a	   game	   show	  
environment	  where	  the	  stakes	  are	  over	  £10,000	  (van	  den	  Assem,	  van	  Dolder,	  and	  Thaler	  
2012).	  Similarly,	  people	  cooperate	  in	  public	  goods	  environments	  when	  the	  rational	  selfish	  
strategy	  is	  to	  give	  nothing.	  The	  most	  prominent	  models	  in	  this	  space	  are	  by	  Rabin	  (1993)	  
and	  Fehr	  and	  Schmidt	  (1999).	  The	  easiest	  way	  to	  summarize	  this	  literature	  is	  to	  say	  that	  
Humans	   are	   nicer	   and	   more	   mannerly	   than	   Econs.	   Specifically,	   their	   first	   instinct	   is	   to	  
cooperate	  as	  long	  as	  they	  expect	  others	  to	  do	  likewise.	  
B.	  Behavioral	  Beliefs	  
When	   people	   make	   choices	   they	   do	   so	   based	   on	   a	   set	   of	   expectations	   about	   the	  
consequences	  of	  their	  choices	  and	  the	  many	  exogenous	  factors	  that	  can	  determine	  how	  the	  
future	   will	   evolve.	   Traditionally,	   economists	   assume	   that	   such	   beliefs	   are	   unbiased.	  
Although	   the	   rational	   expectations	   hypothesis	   as	   first	   formulated	   by	   Muth	   (1961)	   and	  
elaborated	   upon	   by	   Lucas	   (1976)	   and	   many	   others	   is	   often	   considered	   to	   be	   a	   specific	  
approach	  to	  economic	  modeling,	  especially	  in	  macroeconomics,	  I	  think	  it	  is	  fair	  to	  say	  that	  
the	  essential	  idea	  is	  entirely	  mainstream.	  The	  assumption	  of	  rational	  expectations	  makes	  
explicit	  an	  idea	  that	  is	  commonplace	  in	  economic	  theory,	  namely	  that	  agents	  act	  as	  if	  they	  
understood	  the	  model	  (and	  state-­‐of-­‐the-­‐art	  econometrics	  techniques	  as	  well).	  Whether	  this	  
assumption	  is	  empirically	  valid	  is	  another	  question.	  
Explicit	  tests	  of	  rational	  expectations	  per	  se	  are	  uncommon	  because	  we	  rarely	  observe	  or	  
elicit	  actual	  expectations	  data.	  When	  we	  do,	  we	  often	  find	  that	  actual	  expectations	  diverge	  
from	  what	  would	  reasonably	  be	  called	  rational.	  For	  example,	  Case,	  Shiller,	  and	  Thompson	  
(2012)	   find	   that	   homeowners	   during	   the	   period	   of	   rapidly	   rising	   prices	   from	   2000–2005	  
expected	  home	  prices	  to	  continue	  to	  rise	  at	  double-­‐digit	  rates	  for	  the	  next	  decade.	  While	  one	  
can’t	   prove	   such	   expectations	   were	   irrational,	   they	   certainly	   seem	   excessively	   optimistic,	  
both	   ex	   ante	   and	   ex	   post.	   Furthermore,	   in	   this	   domain	   and	   in	   many	   others,	   expectations	  
seem	  to	  rely	  too	  much	  on	  extrapolation	  of	  recent	  trends.	  To	  a	  first	  approximation,	  people	  
expect	  that	  what	  goes	  up	  will	  continue	  to	  go	  up.	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

We	  also	  see	  violations	  of	  rational	  expectations	  in	  the	  predictions	  of	  stock	  market	  returns	  
by	  chief	  financial	  officers	  studied	  by	  Ben-­‐David,	  Graham,	  and	  Harvey	  (2013).	  The	  CFOs	  were	  
asked	   to	   predict	   one-­‐year	   rates	   of	   return	   on	   the	   S&P	   500	   and	   also	   give	   80	   percent	  
confidence	   limits.	   Perhaps	   unsurprisingly,	   the	   CFOs	   had	   essentially	   no	   ability	   to	   predict	  
returns	  in	  the	  stock	  market.	  What	  is	  more	  disturbing	  is	  that	  they	  had	  no	  self-­‐awareness	  of	  
their	   lack	   of	   predictive	   skills.	   If	   the	   CFOs	   had	   well-­‐calibrated	   forecasts	   the	   actual	   stock-­‐
market	   return	   would	   fall	   between	   their	   high	   and	   low	   estimate	   80	   percent	   of	   the	   time.	  
Instead,	   their	   ranges	   included	   the	   actual	   outcome	   for	   just	   36	   percent	   of	   the	   forecasts	  
recorded	   over	   a	   ten-­‐year	   period.	   This	   is	   quite	   similar	   to	   the	   overconfidence	   observed	   in	  
dozens	  of	  laboratory	  studies.	  
Overconfidence	  and	  excessive	  extrapolation	  are	  just	  two	  examples	  of	  biased	  beliefs	  that	  
have	  been	  documented	  by	  psychologists	  studying	  human	  judgment.	  This	  literature	  began	  
with	   the	   original	   three	   heuristics	   studied	   by	   Kahneman	   and	   Tversky—availability,	  
representativeness,	   and	   anchoring	   and	   adjustment—but	   many	   others	   have	   been	  
investigated	   and	   documented	   since	   then:	   hindsight	   bias,	   projection	   bias,	   excessive	  
attention	  to	  whatever	  feature	  of	  the	  environment	  is	  most	  salient,	  etc.	  For	  each	  of	  these	  
biases	   and	   many	   more,	   economists	   have	   created	   descriptive	   models	   to	   try	   to	   make	   the	  
implications	  of	  the	  biases	  more	  specific	  and	  rigorous.	  
The	  fact	  that	  there	  is	  a	  long	  list	  of	  biases	  is	  both	  a	  blessing	  and	  a	  curse.	  The	  blessing	  is	  
that	   there	   are	   a	   multitude	   of	   interesting	   ways	   in	   which	   human	   judgment	   diverges	   from	  
rational	  expectations,	  each	  of	  which	  offers	  the	  possibility	  of	  providing	  useful	  insights	  into	  
economic	   behavior.	   The	   curse	   is	   that	   the	   length	   of	   the	   list	   seems	   to	   offer	   theorists	   a	  
dangerously	  large	  number	  of	  degrees	  of	  freedom.	  Although	  I	  do	  not	  dismiss	  this	  latter	  risk	  
out	  of	  hand,	  I	  think	  good	  scientific	  practices	  can	  mitigate	  this	  degrees-­‐of-­‐freedom	  risk.	  
The	  most	  important	  thing	  to	  remember	  is	  that	  all	  these	  biases	  have	  empirical	  support,	  
and	  many	  of	  the	  laboratory	  findings	  have	  subsequently	  been	  replicated	  in	  the	  field.	  Thus	  
some	  discipline	  has	  already	  been	  imposed:	  behavioral	  economists	  can	  draw	  on	  a	  long	  list	  of	  
potential	  explanatory	  factors,	  but	  for	  each	  there	  is	  at	  least	  some	  evidence	  that	  the	  factor	  is	  
real.	   Compare	   this	   with	   the	   degrees	   of	   freedom	   available	   in	   traditional	   rationality-­‐based	  
models.	   For	   example,	   consider	   the	   all-­‐purpose	   fudge	   factor:	   transaction	   costs.	   In	   the	  
abstract	  such	  costs	  can	  explain	  many	  anomalies,	  but	  unless	  those	  costs	  can	  be	  measured	  the	  
use	  of	  the	  concept	  is	  undisciplined.	  If	  we	  limit	  ourselves	  to	  variables	  that	  have	  an	  empirical	  
basis,	  all	  of	  economics	  will	  become	  more	  disciplined.	  
Of	  course	  I	  do	  not	  mean	  to	  suggest	  that	  behavioral	  economic	  theory	  is	  a	  finished	  product.	  
The	  field	  is	  new	  and	  growing	  rapidly.	  One	  goal	  should	  be	  to	  devise	  theories	  that	  are	  not	  just	  
portable	  extensions	  of	  existing	  models	  but	  also	  testable	  extensions.	  I	  will	  leave	  it	  to	  Rabin	  to	  
decide	  where	  to	  insert	  the	  letter	  T	  into	  his	  PEEM	  acronym.	  
V.	   Supposedly	  Irrelevant	  Factors	  
It	   is	   rare	   that	   economic	   theory	   makes	   predictions	   about	   magnitudes.	   Mostly	   theories	  
make	   predictions	   about	   the	   sign	   of	   an	   effect.	   Demand	   curves	   slope	   down;	   supply	   curves	  
slope	  up.	  When	  a	  clever	  theorist	  is	  able	  to	  extract	  a	  more	  precise	  prediction	  from	  the	  theory,	  
things	   can	   get	   interesting.	   The	   equity	   premium	   puzzle	   is	   a	   case	   in	   point.	   The	   first-­‐order	  
prediction	  that	  stocks	  are	  riskier	  than	  bonds	  and	  so	  should	  earn	  a	  higher	  rate	  of	  return	  is	  
resoundingly	  supported	  by	  the	  historical	  data.	  But	  Mehra	  and	  Prescott	  (1985)	  showed	  that	  
the	  standard	  model	  cannot	  simultaneously	  explain	  the	  low	  historical	  risk-­‐free	  rate	  and	  an	  
equity	  premium	  in	  the	  neighborhood	  of	  6 percent—the	  largest	  value	  they	  could	  justify	  was	  
0.35	  percent.	  As	  a	  result	  of	  this	  calibration	  exercise	  a	  long	  and	  interesting	  literature	  ensued.	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

Although	   such	   examples	   of	   predictions	   about	   magnitude	   are	   uncommon,	   economic	  
theory	  does	  make	  some	  rather	  precise	  predictions	  about	  effect	  sizes,	  namely	  for	  variables	  
that	  should	  have	  no	  effect	  at	  all	  on	  behavior.	  For	  example	  the	  following	  things	  should	  not	  
matter:	  the	  framing	  of	  a	  problem,	  the	  order	  in	  which	  options	  are	  displayed,	  the	  salience	  of	  
one	  option	  over	  another,	  the	  presence	  of	  a	  prior	  sunk	  cost	  (or	  gain),	  whether	  the	  customer	  
at	  a	  restaurant	  can	  see	  the	  dessert	  options	  when	  choosing	  whether	  to	  stick	  to	  the	  planned	  
diet,	  and	  so	  forth.	  I	  call	  these,	  and	  a	  multitude	  of	  other	  possible	  variables	  that	  can	  and	  do	  
influence	  choices,	  “supposedly	  irrelevant	  factors”	  or	  SIFs.	  One	  of	  the	  most	  important	  ways	  
in	  which	  behavioral	  economics	  can	  enrich	  economic	  analyses	  is	  by	  pointing	  out	  the	  SIFs	  that	  
matter	  most.	  
One	   domain	   in	   which	   the	   potential	   importance	   of	   SIFs	   has	   been	   best	   documented	   is	  
retirement	  saving.	  In	  a	  standard	  life-­‐cycle	  model	  Econs	  compute	  their	  optimal	  consumption	  
path	   and	   then	   implement	   a	   plan	   of	   saving,	   investing,	   and	   eventually	   dis-­‐saving	   that	  
maximizes	   lifetime	   utility,	   fully	   incorporating	   proper	   actuarial	   probabilities	   of	   mortality	  
rates	  for	  husband	  and	  wife	  as	  well	  as	  risks	  of	  divorce,	  illness,	  and	  so	  forth.	  This	  is	  a	  problem	  
that	   makes	   playing	   world-­‐class	   chess	   seem	   easy.	   Chess	   has	   neither	   uncertainty	   nor	   self-­‐
control	  problems	  to	  muck	  up	  the	  works.	  So	  it	  should	  not	  be	  surprising	  that	  many	  Humans	  
have	  trouble	  dealing	  with	  retirement	  saving	  in	  a	  defined-­‐contribution	  world	  in	  which	  they	  
have	   to	   make	   all	   the	   decisions	   themselves.	   However,	   it	   has	   been	   possible	   to	   help	   people	  
with	  this	  daunting	  task	  with	  the	  aid	  of	  some	  SIFs.	  
The	   first	   SIF	   that	   has	   been	   important	   in	   helping	   people	   to	   save	   for	   retirement	   is	   the	  
intelligent	  use	  of	  the	  default	  option.	  In	  a	  world	  of	  Econs,	  especially	  when	  the	  stakes	  are	  as	  
high	  as	  they	  are	  for	  retirement	  saving,	  it	  should	  not	  matter	  whether	  someone	  gets	  signed	  up	  
for	  the	  plan	  unless	  he	  opts	  out	  or	  is	  excluded	  from	  the	  plan	  unless	  he	  opts	  in.	  The	  cost	  of	  
ticking	  a	  box	  and	  filling	  out	  a	  form	  must	  be	  tiny	  compared	  to	  the	  benefits	  of	  receiving	  a	  
company	  match	  and	  tax-­‐free	  accumulations	  for	  decades.	  Nevertheless,	  changing	  the	  default	  
has	  had	  an	  enormous	  impact	  on	  the	  utilization	  rates	  of	  401(k)	  plans.	  
The	  first	  paper	  to	  document	  this	  effect	  was	  Madrian	  and	  Shea	  (2001)	  using	  data	  from	  a	  
company	  that	  had	  adopted	  what	  is	  now	  called	  “automatic	  enrollment”	  in	  1999.	  Previously,	  
to	  join	  the	  401(k)	  plan	  employees	  had	  to	  fill	  in	  some	  forms,	  and	  if	  they	  failed	  to	  do	  so,	  they	  
were	  not	  enrolled.	  Madrian	  and	  Shea	  compared	  the	  enrollment	  rates	  for	  new	  employees	  in	  
1998	  under	  the	  old	  “opt	  in”	  regime	  to	  those	  in	  1999	  where	  employees	  had	  to	  opt	  out	  if	  they	  
did	  not	  want	  to	  join.	  Before	  automatic	  enrollment,	  only	  49	  percent	  of	  employees	  joined	  the	  
plan	   within	   their	   first	   year	   of	   employment;	   after	   the	   switch	   to	   automatic	   enrollment,	   86	  
percent	  of	  the	  employees	  were	  enrolled	  in	  their	  first	  year.	  Supposedly	  irrelevant	  indeed!	  By	  
now	  automatic	  enrollment	  is	  widespread.	  More	  than	  half	  of	  large	  US	  employers	  are	  using	  
the	   concept	   and	   the	   United	   Kingdom	   is	   in	   the	   process	   of	   rolling	   out	   a	   national	   defined	  
contribution	  savings	  plan	  with	  this	  feature.	  Most	  plans,	  including	  the	  national	  UK	  plan,	  find	  
that	  opt	  out	  rates	  are	  around	  10	  percent.	  
One	  problem	  with	  automatic	  enrollment	  is	  that	  many	  plans	  initially	  enroll	  employees	  at	  a	  
low	  savings	  rate;	  in	  the	  United	  States	  it	  is	  often	  just	  3	  percent	  of	  pay.	  As	  Madrian	  and	  Shea	  
pointed	   out	   in	   their	   initial	   paper,	   such	   a	   low	   initial	   default	   savings	   rate	   can	   have	   the	  
unintended	  consequence	  of	  reducing	  the	  savings	  of	  those	  who,	  lacking	  a	  default,	  would	  have	  
chosen	  to	  save	  more.	  As	  one	  solution	  to	  this	  problem,	  and	  more	  generally	  as	  a	  way	  to	  nudge	  
employees	  to	  increase	  their	  savings	  rates,	  Shlomo	  Benartzi	  and	  I	  (Thaler	  and	  Benartzi 2004)	  
introduced	  a	  plan	  we	  called	  “Save	  More	  Tomorrow.”	  Under	  this	  plan,	  workers	  are	  offered	  
the	  option	  to	  increase	  their	  savings	  rate	  starting	  at	  some	  later	  date,	  ideally	  when	  they	  get	  
their	   next	   raise.	   Once	   an	   employee	   enrolls	   in	   the	   plan,	   her	   savings	   rate	   keeps	   increasing	  
until	  she	  reaches	  some	  cap	  or	  opts	  out.	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

Notice	  that	  Save	  More	  Tomorrow	  is	  just	  a	  collection	  of	  SIFs.	  It	  should	  not	  matter	  that	  the	  
savings	  rate	  is	  increased	  in	  a	  few	  months	  rather	  than	  now,	  nor	  that	  the	  increases	  are	  linked	  
to	  pay	  increases,	  nor	  that	  the	  default	  is	  to	  stay	  in	  the	  plan,	  but	  of	  course	  all	  these	  features	  
help.	   Putting	   off	   the	   increase	   in	   saving	   to	   the	   future	   helps	   those	   who	   are	   present	   biased;	  
linking	  to	  increases	  in	  pay	  mitigates	  loss	  aversion;	  and	  making	  staying	  in	  the	  plan	  the	  default	  
puts	  status	  quo	  bias	  to	  good	  use.	  In	  the	  first	  plan	  Benartzi	  and	  I	  studied	  (Thaler	  and	  Benartzi	  
2004),	  savings	  rates	  more	  than	  tripled	  in	  three	  years.	  In	  a	  recent	  paper	  (Benartzi	  and	  Thaler 
2013)	  we	  estimated	  that	  automatic	  escalation	  (the	  generic	  term	  for	  Save	  More	  Tomorrow,	  in	  
which	  savings	  increases	  are	  not	  always	  linked	  to	  pay	  increases)	  had	  boosted	  annual	  savings	  
by	  $7.4	  billion.	  
One	  worry	  about	  such	  programs	  has	  been	  that	  the	  increases	  we	  observe	  in	  retirement	  
savings	   produced	   by	   automatic	   enrollment	   and	   Save	   More	   Tomorrow	   might	   be	   offset	   by	  
reductions	  in	  savings	  (or	  increases	  in	  borrowing)	  in	  other	  accounts.	  However,	  there	  was	  no	  
dataset	  in	  the	  United	  States	  that	  allowed	  anyone	  to	  test	  this	  hypothesis.	  Fortunately,	  such	  
data	  do	  exist	  in	  Denmark,	  which,	  because	  of	  a	  history	  of	  having	  a	  wealth	  tax,	  has	  long	  kept	  
good	  data	  on	  household	  wealth.	  A	  recent	  paper	  by	  Chetty	  et	  al.	  (2014)	  has	  made	  use	  of	  these	  
data	  to	  answer	  this	  question.	  
The	   method	   Chetty	   et	   al.	   (2014)	   use	   is	   to	   see	   what	   happens	   to	   savings	   rates	   when	   an	  
employee	  moves	  jobs	  to	  an	  employer	  with	  a	  more	  generous	  retirement	  savings	  plan.	  Using	  
panel	   data	   with	   41	   million	   person-­‐year	   observations	   the	   authors	   study	   three	   kinds	   of	  
savings:	  employer	  contributions	  to	  tax-­‐sheltered	  pensions,	  employee	  contributions	  to	  those	  
pensions,	   and	   employee	   savings	   in	   taxable	   accounts.	   Their	   research	   strategy	   is	   to	   study	  
those	  employees	  who	  have	  been	  saving	  a	  positive	  amount	  on	  their	  own	  and	  then	  switch	  to	  a	  
firm	  whose	  contributions	  are	  at	  least	  3	  percentage	  points	  higher.	  On	  average	  these	  workers	  
receive	  an	  increase	  in	  pension	  contributions	  of	  5.64	  percent	  of	  labor	  income.	  Do	  workers	  
contribute	  less	  to	  compensate	  for	  this	  change	  in	  their	  employers	  generosity?	  Yes,	  but	  just	  by	  
0.56	  percentage	  points.	  And	  saving	  in	  taxable	  accounts	  is	  essentially	  unchanged.	  
Chetty	   et	   al.	   (2014)	   also	   make	   use	   of	   a	   change	   in	   tax	   policy	   that	   occurred	   during	   the	  
period	   for	   which	   they	   have	   data.	   This	   natural	   experiment	   allowed	   them	   to	   compare	   the	  
effectiveness	  of	  the	  tax	  subsidy	  given	  to	  pension	  contributions	  in	  encouraging	  retirement	  
savings	   relative	   to	   the	   effects	   of	   design	   features	   such	   as	   the	   employer	   contribution.	   The	  
change	  in	  the	  law	  they	  exploit	  was	  a	  reduction	  in	  the	  subsidy	  given	  to	  retirement	  saving	  for	  
roughly	   the	   top	   quintile	   of	   the	   income	   distribution.	   Even	   among	   this	   relatively	   affluent	  
group,	   the	   vast	   majority	   did	   not	   react	   at	   all	   to	   the	   change	   in	   the	   subsidy—they	   were	  
“passive	   savers.”	   About	   20	   percent	   of	   this	   segment	   did	   react	   and	   eliminated	   all	   their	  
contributions	   to	   the	   tax-­‐sheltered	   plans,	   but	   they	   did	   not	   spend	   that	   money;	   they	   just	  
shifted	  it	  to	  taxable	  savings	  vehicles.	  This	  leads	  to	  a	  remarkable	  conclusion.	  Each	  $1	  of	  tax	  
expenditure	   on	   retirement	   savings	   only	   produced	   a	   penny	   in	   increased	   savings.	   What	  
determines	  savings	  rates	  is	  not	  tax	  policy	  but	  the	  design	  features	  of	  the	  employer	  pension	  
plans,	  
i.e.,	  SIFs.	  
There	   are	   many	   other	   examples	   of	   the	   potential	   power	   of	   behavioral	   factors	   in	   policy	  
analysis	  but	  summarizing	  them	  would	  be	  a	  waste	  of	  time.	  I	  cannot	  possibly	  do	  a	  better	  job	  of	  
that	  than	  Raj	  Chetty	  (2015)	  did	  last	  year	  in	  his	  Ely	  lecture:	  “Behavioral	  Economics	  and	  Public	  
Policy:	  A	  Pragmatic	  Perspective.”	  I	  completely	  endorse	  his	  view	  that	  the	  best	  way	  to	  proceed	  
is	  to	  stop	  arguing	  about	  theoretical	  principles	  and	  just	  get	  down	  to	  work	  figuring	  out	  the	  best	  
way	  of	  understanding	  the	  world.	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

VI.	   Conclusion	  
There	   is	   one	   central	   theme	   of	   this	   essay:	   it	   is	   time	   to	   fully	   embrace	   what	   I	   would	   call	  
evidence-­‐based	   economics.	   This	   should	   not	   be	   a	   hard	   sell.	   Economists	   use	   the	   most	  
sophisticated	  statistical	  techniques	  of	  any	  social	  science,	  have	  access	  to	  increasingly	  large	  
and	  rich	  datasets,	  and	  have	  embraced	  numerous	  new	  methods	  from	  experiments	  (both	  lab	  
and	   field)	   to	   brain	   imaging	   to	   machine	   learning.	   Furthermore,	   economics	   has	   become	   an	  
increasingly	  empirical	  discipline.	  Hamermesh	  (2013)	  finds	  that	  the	  percentage	  of	  “theory”	  
papers	  in	  top	  economics	  journals	  has	  fallen	  from	  50.7	  percent	  in	  1963	  to	  19.1	  percent	  in	  
2011.	  We	  are	  undeniably	  an	  empirical	  discipline—so	  let’s	  embrace	  that.	  
Viewed	   in	   this	   context,	   behavioral	   economics	   is	   simply	   one	   part	   of	   the	   growing	  
importance	  of	  empirical	  work	  in	  economics.	  There	  is	  nothing	  unique	  about	  incorporating	  
psychological	  factors	  such	  as	  framing,	  self-­‐control,	  and	  fairness	  into	  economics	  analyses.	  If	  
such	  factors	  help	  us	  understand	  the	  world	  better	  and	  improve	  predictions	  about	  behavior,	  
then	  why	  wouldn’t	  we	  use	  them	  just	  like	  we	  would	  use	  any	  other	  new	  source	  of	  data	  such	  as	  
web	  searches	  or	  genetic	  markers?	  
In	  this	  sense	  I	  think	  it	  is	  time	  to	  stop	  thinking	  about	  behavioral	  economics	  as	  some	  kind	  
of	   revolution.	   Rather,	   behavioral	   economics	   should	   be	   considered	   simply	   a	   return	   to	   the	  
kind	  of	  open-­‐minded,	  intuitively	  motivated	  discipline	  that	  was	  invented	  by	  Adam	  Smith	  and	  
augmented	   by	   increasingly	   powerful	   statistical	   tools	   and	   datasets.	   This	   evidence-­‐based	  
discipline	   will	   still	   be	   theoretically	   grounded,	   but	   not	   in	   such	   a	   way	   that	   restricts	   our	  
attention	  to	  only	  those	  factors	  that	  can	  be	  derived	  from	  our	  traditional	  normative	  traditions.	  
Indeed,	  my	  sense	  is	  that	  we	  are	  at	  the	  beginning	  of	  a	  new	  wave	  of	  theoretical	  developments	  
made	  possible	  simply	  by	  turning	  our	  attention	  to	  the	  study	  of	  Humans	  rather	  than	  Econs.	  
If	   economics	   does	   develop	   along	   these	   lines	   the	   term	   “behavioral	   economics”	   will	  
eventually	   disappear	   from	   our	   lexicon.	   All	   economics	   will	   be	   as	   behavioral	   as	   the	   topic	  
requires,	  and	  as	  a	  result,	  we	  will	  have	  an	  approach	  to	  economics	  that	  yields	  a	  higher	  R2.	  
REFERENCES	  
Arrow,	  Kenneth	  J.	  1986.	  “Rationality	  of	  Self	  and	  Others	  in	  an	  Economic	  System.”	  Journal	  of	  Business	  59	  (4,	  part	  2):	  
S385–S399.	  	  
Ashraf,	  Nava,	  Colin	  F.	  Camerer,	  and	  George	  Loewenstein.	  2005.	  “Adam	  Smith,	  Behavioral	  Economist.”	  Journal	  of	  
Economic	  Perspectives	  19	  (3):	  131–45.	  	  
Atkinson,	  Anthony	  B.,	  Thomas	  Piketty,	  and	  Emmanuel	  Saez.	  2011.	  “Top	  Incomes	  in	  the	  Long	  Run	  of	  History.”	  
Journal	  of	  Economic	  Literature	  49	  (1):	  3–71.	  	  
Barberis,	  Nicholas,	  and	  Richard	  Thaler.	  2003.	  “A	  Survey	  of	  Behavioral	  Finance.”	  In	  Handbook	  of	  the	  Economics	  of	  
Finance,	  Vol.	  1B,	  edited	  by	  George	  M.	  Constantinides,	  Milton	  Harris,	  and	  Rene	  Stulz,	  1053–1123.	  Amsterdam:	  
Elsevier.	  	  
Benartzi,	   Shlomo,	   and	   Richard	   H.	   Thaler.	   2013.	   “Behavioral	   Economics	   and	   the	   Retirement	   Savings	   Crisis.”	  
Science	  339	  (6124):	  1152–53.	  	  
Ben-­‐David,	  Itzhak,	  John	  R.	  Graham,	  and	  Campbell	  R.	  Harvey.	  2013.	  “Managerial	  Miscalibration.”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  
of	  Economics	  128	  (4):	  1547–84.	  	  
Black,	  Fischer.	  1986.	  “Noise.”	  Journal	  of	  Finance	  41	  (3):	  529–43.	  	  
Camerer,	   Colin.	   1997.	   “Labor	   Supply	   of	   New	   York	   City	   Cabdrivers:	   One	   Day	   at	   a	   Time.”	   Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  
Economics	  112	  (2):	  407–41.	  	  
Card,	  David,	  Jorg	  Heining,	  and	  Patrick	  Kline.	  2013.	  “Workplace	  Heterogeneity	  and	  the	  Rise	  of	  West	  German	  Wage	  
Inequality.”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  128	  (3):	  967–1015.	  	  
Case,	   Karl	   E.,	   Robert	   J.	   Shiller,	   and	   Anne	   Thompson.	   2012.	   “What	   Have	   They	   Been	   Thinking?	   Home	   Buyer	  
Behavior	  in	  Hot	  and	  Cold	  Markets.”	  National	  Bureau	  of	  Economic	  Research	  Working	  Paper	  18400.	  	  
Chetty,	   Raj.	   2015.	   “Behavioral	   Economics	   and	   Public	   Policy:	   A	   Pragmatic	   Perspective.”	   American	   Economic	  
Review	  105	  (5):	  1–33.	  Video	  of	  lecture:	  https://www.aeaweb.org/webcasts/2015/Ely.php.	  	  
Chetty,	   Raj,	   John	   N.	   Friedman,	   Søren	   Leth-­‐Petersen,	   Torben	   Heien	   Nielsen,	   and	   Tore	   Olsen.	   2014.	   “Active	   vs.	  
Passive	   Decisions	   and	   Crowd-­‐Out	   in	   Retirement	   Savings	   Accounts:	   Evidence	   from	   Denmark.”	   Quarterly	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

Journal	  of	  Economics	  129	  (3):	  1141–1219.	  	  
Clark,	  J.	  M.	  1918.	  “Economics	  and	  Modern	  Psychology:	  I.”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  26	  (1):	  1–30.	  	  
Crawford,	  Vincent	  P.,	  and	  Juanjuan	  Meng.	  2011.	  “New	  York	  City	  Cab	  Drivers’	  Labor	  Supply	  Revisited:	  Reference-­‐
Dependent	   Preferences	   with	   Rational-­‐Expectations	   Targets	   for	   Hours	   and	   Income.”	   American	   Economic	  
Review	  101	  (5):	  1912–32.	  	  
De	  Bondt,	  Werner	  F.	  M.,	  and	  Richard	  Thaler.	  1985.	  “Does	  the	  Stock	  Market	  Overreact?”	  Journal	  of	  Finance	  40	  (3):	  
793–805.	  	  
De	  Bondt,	  Werner	  F.	  M.,	  and	  Richard	  H.	  Thaler.	  1987.	  “Further	  Evidence	  on	  Investor	  Overreaction	  and	  Stock	  
Market	  Seasonality.”	  Journal	  of	  Finance	  42	  (3):	  557–81.	  	  
DellaVigna,	  Stefano,	  and	  Ulrike	  Malmendier.	  2006.	  “Paying	  Not	  to	  Go	  to	  the	  Gym.”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  96	  
(3):	  694–719.	  	  
Dickens,	  William	  T.,	  and	  Lawrence	  F.	  Katz.	  1986.	  “Interindustry	  Wage	  Differences	  and	  Industry	  Characteristics.”	  
National	  Bureau	  of	  Economic	  Research	  Working	  Paper	  2014.	  
Fama,	   Eugene	   F.,	   and	   Kenneth	   R.	   French.	   1993.	   “Common	   Risk	   Factors	   in	   the	   Returns	   on	   Stock	   and	   Bonds.”	  
Journal	  of	  Financial	  Economics	  33	  (1):	  3–56.	  	  
Farber,	  Henry	  S.	  2015.	  “Why	  You	  Can’t	  Find	  a	  Taxi	  in	  the	  Rain	  and	  Other	  Labor	  Supply	  Lessons	  from	  Cab	  Drivers.”	  
Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  130	  (4):	  1975–2026.	  	  
Fehr,	  Ernst,	  and	  Klaus	  M.	  Schmidt.	  1999.	  “A	  Theory	  of	  Fairness,	  Competition,	  and	  Cooperation.”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  
of	  Economics	  114	  (3):	  817–68.	  	  
Fisher,	   Irving.	   1930.	   The	  Theory	  of	  Interest:	  As	  Determined	  by	  Impatience	  to	  Spend	  Income	  and	  Opportunity	  to	  
Invest	  It.	  New	  York:	  MacMillan.	  	  
Friedman,	   Milton.	   1953.	   “The	   Methodology	   of	   Positive	   Economics.”	   In	   Essays	   in	   Positive	   Economics,	   3–43.	  
Chicago:	  University	  of	  Chicago	  Press.	  
Fudenberg,	   Drew,	   and	   David	   K.	   Levine.	   2006.	   “A	   Dual	   Self	   Model	   of	   Impulse	   Control.”	   Harvard	   Institute	   of	  
Economic	  Research	  Working	  Paper	  2112.	  	  
Graham,	  Benjamin.	  1973.	  The	  Intelligent	  Investor,	  A	  Book	  of	  Practical	  Counsel.	  4th	  revised	  ed.	  New	  York:	  Harper	  
&	  Row,	  (Orig.	  pub.	  1949).	  
Grether,	   David	   M.,	   and	   Charles	   R.	   Plott.	   1979.	   “Economic	   Theory	   of	   Choice	   and	   the	   Preference	   Reversal	  
Phenomenon.”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  69	  (4):	  623–38.	  	  
Hamermesh,	  Daniel	  S.	  2013.	  “Six	  Decades	  of	  Top	  Economics	  Publishing:	  Who	  and	  How?”	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  
Literature	  51	  (1):	  162–72.	  	  
Hogarth,	   Robin	   M.,	   and	   Melvin	   W.	   Reder,	   eds.	   1986.	   “The	   Behavioral	   Foundations	   of	   Economic	   Theory:	  
Proceedings	  of	  a	  Conference	  October	  13–15,	  1985.”	  Journal	  of	  Business	  59	  (4,	  part	  2).	  	  
Hogarth,	   Robin	   M.,	   and	   Melvin	   W.	   Reder,	   eds.	   1987.	   Rational	   Choice:	   The	   Contrast	   Between	   Economics	   and	  
Psychology.	  Chicago:	  University	  of	  Chicago	  Press.	  	  
Jensen,	  M.	  C.	  1968.	  “The	  Performance	  of	  Mutual	  Funds	  in	  the	  Period	  1945–1964.”	  Journal	  of	  Finance	  23:	  389–416.	  	  
Kahneman,	   Daniel,	   and	   Amos	   Tversky.	   1979.	   “Prospect	   Theory:	   An	   Analysis	   of	   Decision	   under	   Risk.”	  
Econometrica	  47	  (2):	  263–91.	  	  
Kaplan,	   Steven	   N.,	   Mark	   M.	   Klebanov,	   and	   Morten	   Sorensen.	   2012.	   “Which	   CEO	   Characteristics	   and	   Abilities	  
Matter?”	  Journal	  of	  Finance	  67	  (3):	  973–1007.	  	  
Katona,	  George.	  1951.	  Psychological	  Analysis	  of	  Economic	  Behavior.	  New	  York:	  McGraw-­‐Hill.	  	  
Katona,	  George.	  1953.	  “Rational	  Behavior	  and	  Economic	  Behavior.”	  Psychological	  Review	  60	  (5):	  307–18.	  	  
Keynes,	  John	  Maynard.	  1936.	  The	  General	  Theory	  of	  Employment,	  Interest,	  and	  Money.	  London:	  Macmillan.	  	  
Krueger,	  Alan	  B.,	  and	  Lawrence	  H.	  Summers.	  1988.	  “Efficiency	  Wages	  and	  the	  Inter-­‐industry	  Wage	  Structure.”	  
Econometrica	  56	  (2):	  259–93.	  	  
Laibson,	  David.	  1997.	  “Golden	  Eggs	  and	  Hyperbolic	  Discounting.”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  112	  (2):	  443–77.	  	  
Lakonishok,	  Josef,	  Andrei	  Shleifer,	  and	  Robert	  W.	  Vishny.	  1994.	  “Contrarian	  Investment,	  Extrapolation,	  and	  Risk.”	  
Journal	  of	  Finance	  49	  (5):	  1541–78.	  	  
Lamont,	  Owen	  A.,	  and	  Richard	  H.	  Thaler.	  2003a.	  “Anomalies:	  The	  Law	  of	  One	  Price	  in	  Financial	  Markets.”	  Journal	  
of	  Economic	  Perspectives	  17	  (4):	  191–202.	  	  
Lamont,	  Owen	  A.,	  and	  Richard	  H.	  Thaler.	  2003b.	  “Can	  the	  Market	  Add	  and	  Subtract?	  Mispricing	  in	  Tech	  Stock	  
Carve-­‐Outs.”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  111	  (2):	  227–68.	  	  
Lester,	   Richard	   A.	   1946.	   “Shortcomings	   of	   Marginal	   Analysis	   for	   Wage-­‐Employment	   Problems.”	   American	  
Economic	  Review	  36	  (1):	  63–82.	  	  
Lichtenstein,	   Sarah,	   and	   Paul	   Slovic.	   1971.	   “Reversals	   of	   Preference	   Between	   Bids	   and	   Choices	   in	   Gambling	  
Decisions.”	  Journal	  of	  Experimental	  Psychology	  89	  (1):	  46–55.	  	  
Lichtenstein,	   Sarah,	   and	   Paul	   Slovic.	   1973.	   “Response-­‐Induced	   Reversals	   of	   Preference	   in	   Gambling:	   An	  
Extended	  Replication	  in	  Las	  Vegas.”	  Journal	  of	  Experimental	  Psychology	  101	  (1):	  16–20.	  	  
Loewenstein,	  George.	  1992.	  “The	  Fall	  and	  Rise	  of	  Psychological	  Explanations	  in	  the	  Economics	  of	  Intertemporal	  
Choice.”	  In	  Choice	  Over	  Time,	  edited	  by	  George	  Loewenstein	  and	  Jon	  Elster,	  3–34.	  New	  York:	  Russell	  Sage	  
Foundation.	  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606


---

Lucas,	  Robert	  E.,	  Jr.	  1976.	  “Econometric	  Policy	  Evaluation:	  A	  Critique.”	  Carnegie-­‐Rochester	  Conference	  Series	  on	  
Public	  Policy	  1:	  19–46.	  	  
Machlup,	  Fritz.	  1946.	  “Marginal	  Analysis	  and	  Empirical	  Research.”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  36	  (4):	  519–54.	  	  
Madrian,	  Brigitte	  C.,	  and	  Dennis	  F.	  Shea.	  2001.	  “The	  Power	  of	  Suggestion:	  Inertia	  in	  401(k)	  Participation	  and	  
Savings	  Behavior.”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  116	  (4):	  1149–87.	  	  
Mehra,	  Rajnish,	  and	  Edward	  C.	  Prescott.	  1985.	  “The	  Equity	  Premium:	  A	  Puzzle.”	  Journal	  of	  Monetary	  Economics	  
15	  (2):	  145–61.	  	  
Mishel,	  Lawrence,	  and	  Alyssa	  Davis.	  2015.	  “Top	  CEOs	  Make	  300	  Times	  More	  than	  Typical	  Workers.”	  Economic	  
Policy	   Institute	   Issue	   Brief	   399.	   http://www.epi.org/publication/top-­‐ceos-­‐make-­‐300-­‐times-­‐more-­‐than-­‐
workers-­‐pay-­‐growth-­‐surpasses-­‐market-­‐gains-­‐and-­‐the-­‐rest-­‐of-­‐the-­‐0-­‐1-­‐percent/.	  
Muth,	  J.	  F.	  1961.	  “Rational	  Expectations	  and	  the	  Theory	  of	  Price	  Movements.”	  Econometrica	  29:	  315–35.	  	  
O’Donoghue,	   Ted,	   and	   Matthew	   Rabin.	   1999.	   “Procrastination	   in	   Preparing	   for	   Retirement.”	   In	   Behavioral	  
Dimensions	   of	   Retirement	   Economics,	   edited	   by	   Henry	   J.	   Aaron,	   125–56.	   Washington,	   DC:	   Brookings	  
Institution.	  
Pareto,	  Vilfredo.	  2014.	  Manual	  of	  Political	  Economy:	  A	  Critical	  and	  Variorum	  Translation	  Edition.	  Reprint	  edited	  
by	  Aldo	  Montesano,	  Alberto	  Zanni,	  Luigino	  Bruni,	  John	  S.	  Chipman,	  and	  Michael	  McLure.	  Oxford,	  UK:	  Oxford	  
University	  Press	  (Orig.	  pub.	  1906).	  	  
Pigou,	   Arthur	   Cecil.	   1920.	   The	   Economics	   of	   Welfare.	   http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1410	   (accessed	   May	   23,	  
2016).	  
Piketty,	  Thomas.	  2014.	  Capital	  in	  the	  Twenty-­‐First	  Century.	  Cambridge,	  MA:	  Harvard	  University	  Press.	  
Rabin,	  Matthew.	  1993.	  “Incorporating	  Fairness	  into	  Game	  Theory	  and	  Economics.”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  
83	  (5):	  1281–1302.	  	  
Rabin,	  Matthew.	  2013.	  “An	  Approach	  to	  Incorporating	  Psychology	  into	  Economics.”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  
103	  (3):	  617–22.	  	  
Schelling,	  Thomas	  C.	  1984.	  “Self-­‐Command	  in	  Practice,	  in	  Policy,	  and	  in	  a	  Theory	  of	  Rational	  Choice.”	  American	  
Economic	  Review	  74	  (2):	  1–11.	  	  
Shiller,	  Robert	  J.	  1984.	  “Stock	  Prices	  and	  Social	  Dynamics.”	  Brookings	  Papers	  on	  Economic	  Activity	  (2):	  457–98.	  	  
Simon,	  Herbert	  A.	  1955.	  “A	  Behavioral	  Model	  of	  Rational	  Choice.”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  69	  (1):	  99–118.	  	  
Simon,	  Herbert	  A.	  1957.	  Models	  of	  Man:	  Social	  and	  Rational;	  Mathematical	  Essays	  on	  Rational	  Human	  Behavior	  in	  
a	  Social	  Setting.	  Oxford,	  UK:	  Wiley.	  	  
Simon,	  Herbert	  A.	  1987.	  “Behavioural	  Economics.”	  In	  The	  New	  Palgrave:	  A	  Dictionary	  of	  Economics,	  edited	  by	  
John	  Eatwell,	  Murray	  Milgate,	  and	  Peter	  Newman.	  Palgrave	  Macmillan.	  	  
Slichter,	  Sumner	  H.	  1950.	  “Notes	  on	  the	  Structure	  of	  Wages.”	  Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  Statistics	  32	  (1):	  80–91.	  	  
Smith,	   Adam.	   1759.	   The	   Theory	   of	   Moral	   Sentiments.	   Reprint	   edited	   by	   D.	   D.	   Raphael	   and	   A.	   L.	   Macfie.	  
Indianapolis:	  Liberty	  Classics,	  1981.	  	  
Smith,	  Adam.	  1776.	  An	  Inquiry	  into	  the	  Nature	  and	  Causes	  of	  the	  Wealth	  of	  Nations.	  Reprint	  edited	  by	  R.	  H.	  
Campbell	  and	  A.	  S.	  Skinner.	  Indianapolis:	  Liberty	  Classics,	  1981.	  
Strotz,	  R.	  H.	  1955.	  “Myopia	  and	  Inconsistency	  in	  Dynamic	  Utility	  Maximization.”	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Studies	  23	  
(3):	  165–80.	  	  
Thaler,	   Richard	   H.	   1980.	   “Toward	   a	   Positive	   Theory	   of	   Consumer	   Choice.”	   Journal	   of	   Economic	   Behavior	   &	  
Organization	  1	  (1):	  39–60.	  	  
Thaler,	  Richard	  H.	  1989.	  “Interindustry	  Wage	  Differentials.”	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  Perspectives	  3	  (2):	  181–93.	  	  
Thaler,	  Richard	  H.	  2015.	  Misbehaving:	  The	  Making	  of	  Behavioral	  Economics.	  New	  York:	  W.	  W.	  Norton	  &	  Company.	  	  
Thaler,	  Richard	  H.,	  and	  Shlomo	  Benartzi.	  2004.	  “Save	  More	  Tomorrow:	  Using	  Behavioral	  Economics	  to	  Increase	  
Employee	  Saving.”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  112	  (1):	  S164–87.	  	  
Thaler,	  Richard	  H.,	  and	  H.	  M.	  Shefrin.	  1981.	  “An	  Economic	  Theory	  of	  Self-­‐Control.”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  89	  
(2):	  392–406.	  	  
Tversky,	  Amos,	  and	  Daniel	  Kahneman.	  1974.	  “Judgment	  under	  Uncertainty:	  Heuristics	  and	  Biases.”	  Science	  185	  
(4157):	  1124–31.	  	  
van	  den	  Assem,	  Martijn	  J.,	  Dennie	  van	  Dolder,	  and	  Richard	  H.	  Thaler.	  2012.	  “Split	  or	  Steal?	  Cooperative	  Behavior	  
When	  the	  Stakes	  Are	  Large.”	  Management	  Science	  58	  (1):	  2–20.	  	  
von	  Neumann,	  John,	  and	  Oskar	  Morgenstern.	  1947.	  Theory	  of	  Games	  and	  Economic	  Behavior.	  2nd	  ed.	  Princeton:	  
Princeton	  University	  Press.	  	  
Vulkan, Nir. 2000. “An Economist’s Perspective on Probability Matching.” Journal of Economic Surveys 14 (1): 101–
18. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2790606
