Version of Record: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022435919300247
Manuscript_0dcf578136b52dbc2c4abdf37be92fae
Loyalty Formation for Different Customer Journey Segments
Dennis Herhausen*
Associate Professor of Marketing
KEDGE Business School
6CJM+WC Marseille, France
Phone: +33.4.9182.7357
E-mail: dennis.herhausen@kedgebs.com
Kristina Kleinlercher
Postdoctoral Researcher
University of St. Gallen
Dufourstr. 40a, 9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland
Phone: +41.71.224 7185
E-mail: kristina.kleinlercher@unisg.ch
Peter C. Verhoef
Professor of Marketing
University of Groningen
Nettelbosje 2, 9747 Groningen, The Netherlands
Phone: +31.50.363.7320
E-mail: p.c.verhoef@rug.nl
Oliver Emrich
Professor of Management and Social Media
University of Mainz
Jakob-Welder-Weg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany
Phone: +49.6131.39 22006
E-mail: oemrich@uni-mainz.de
Thomas Rudolph
Professor of Marketing and International Retail Management
University of St. Gallen
Dufourstr. 40a, 9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland
Phone: +41.71.224 2856
E-mail: thomas.rudolph@unisg.ch
Acknowledgment: The authors thank Kay Lemon, Jeff Inman, Evert de Haan, and Michael Paul for their
helpful comments as well as the participants of the EMAC special session “Customer Management: From
Pay & Satisfaction to Retention & Recommendation” for their feedback.
*Corresponding author.
© 2019. This manuscript version is made available under the Elsevier user license
https://www.elsevier.com/open-access/userlicense/1.0/
Loyalty Formation for Different Customer Journey Segments
Abstract
The proliferation of new touchpoints empowers today’s customers to design their own journey
from search to purchase. To address this new complexity, we segment customers by their use of
specific touchpoints in the customer journey, investigate the association of several covariates
with segment membership, consider the rise of mobile devices as potential “game changers” of
existing segments, and explore how the relationships among product satisfaction, journey
satisfaction, customer inspiration, and customer loyalty differ across segments. Based on
anticipated utility theory and using latent class analyses on large-scale data from two samples of
2,443 and 2,649 journeys, we identify five time-consistent segments―store-focused shoppers,
pragmatic online shoppers, extensive online shoppers, multiple touchpoint shoppers, and online-
to-offline shoppers―that differ considerably in their touchpoint and mobile device usage, their
segment-specific covariates, and their search and purchase patterns. The five segments remain
unchanged in the two data sets even though the usage of mobile devices has increased
substantially. Furthermore, we find that the relationships between various loyalty antecedents
and customer loyalty differ between the segments. The insights from this paper help retailers
develop segment-specific customer journey strategies.
Keywords: customer journey, customer satisfaction, customer inspiration, touchpoints,
omnichannel management, latent class analyses, customer segmentation
1
Introduction
Due to the explosion of digital technologies and the rise of new channels and new devices,
customers now interact with retailers through a myriad of touchpoints (Grewal, Roggeveen, and
Nordfält 2016; Verhoef, Kannan, and Inman 2015). As a result, customer journeys are becoming
more extensive and versatile (Edelman and Singer 2015). To manage these complex customer
journeys successfully, retailers need to identify and understand different journey segments and
their unique characteristics. This highly relevant topic requires more attention because most
retailers―if at all―segment customers based solely on a subset of their own proprietary
touchpoints, mostly online, where data are readily available (Anderl, Schuhmann, and Kunz
2016). However, such a segmentation approach neglects offline, competitor, and other important
touchpoints that are part of the customer journey and have the potential to affect customers
(Baxendale, Mcdonald, and Wilson 2015). In this paper, we define customer journey segments as
homogenous groups of customers with a similar touchpoint usage during the customer journey,
which encompasses not only retailer touchpoints but also the aforementioned touchpoints.
Identifying customer journey segments becomes even more challenging due to the
increasing importance of mobile devices (Verhoef et al. 2017). Despite the popularity of mobile
devices among customers, knowledge of their impact on the customer journey remains limited
(Shankar et al. 2016), and no segmentation study to date has considered mobile device usage as a
segmentation criterion. Because mobile devices may influence different multichannel behaviors,
such as by making research shopping much easier for customers (Gensler, Neslin, and Verhoef
2017; Rapp et al. 2015), mobile devices may affect customer segmentation. So far, the major
question of whether the mobile device is conflating customer journeys or whether it is “just
another device used to shop” (Lemon and Verhoef 2016, p. 80) remains unanswered.
2
Another top priority among retailers is to understand the behavior of customers throughout
their journey. The Marketing Science Institute (2018) considers understanding sources of loyalty
during the customer journey as one of its most important research challenges, particularly in light
of the increasing number of touchpoints that may divert customers along their journey.
Moreover, creating a positive journey experience should enhance not only short-term sales but
also customer loyalty (Court et al. 2009). However, existing research has focused strongly on
conversion as the sole outcome of digital journeys (e.g., Kannan, Reinartz and Verhoef 2016)
while failing to consider long-term loyalty effects (Lemon and Verhoef 2016). Creating customer
loyalty by satisfying and inspiring customers during their journey is crucial for retailers in order
to sustain their competitive advantage (Edelman and Singer 2015).
In light of the gaps outlined above, the purpose of this paper is to address three research
objectives associated with different types of customer journeys and customer loyalty along these
journeys (Lemon and Verhoef 2016; Marketing Science Institute 2018). First, we identify
different customer journey segments. Second, we explore the robustness of the customer journey
segments with regard to the rise of the mobile device. Third, we investigate which components
of customer experience (i.e., product satisfaction, journey satisfaction, and customer inspiration)
contribute most strongly to customer loyalty for the distinct customer journey segments.
We address these objectives by examining two samples of 2,443 and 2,649 journeys of
retail customers in 2013 and 2016. We employ latent class analyses to segment customers by
their usage of different touchpoints during the search and purchase phase. Three major insights
of our analysis deserve particular attention. First, we identify five robust journey
segments―store-focused shoppers, pragmatic online shoppers, extensive online shoppers,
multiple touchpoint shoppers, and online-to-offline shoppers―and their segment-specific
3
covariates. Each segment represents a unique combination of different touchpoints and mobile
device usage varies considerably across the journey segments. Second, we confirm the stability
of these segments over time, even though mobile usage increased considerably in our samples.
Third, we empirically confirm segment-specific hypotheses for the five customer journey
segments and, thus reveal different sources of loyalty for different customer journey segments.
Our findings contribute to the literature in several ways. First, compared to prior
segmentation studies, we consider a more extensive set of touchpoints and include non-retailer-
owned touchpoints in the search phase. By doing so, we demonstrate the existence of new
customer journey segments that have not yet been identified. Specifically, we find two distinct
online-focused segments and a dedicated segment of online-to-offline research shoppers. We
further explore the existence of segment-specific moments of truth, defined as the most important
touchpoints in the customer journey for the purchase decision. For example, a consumer who
spent hours online to find a new high-quality laptop at an affordable price might experience the
moment of truth when comparing customer reviews for several shortlisted products.
Furthermore, we shed light onto the most prevalent touchpoint sequences that vary considerably
across segments. Mobile usage also differs substantially across segments, with the highest usage
of mobile devices among customers in the multi-touchpoint segment. Second, this research is the
first to examine whether the usage of mobile devices may change customer journey segments.
Despite completely different mobile adoption rates by segments, we find that the five segments
remain stable. This result suggests that specific segments are responsible for the rise of mobile
usage in customer journeys, but at the same time, that mobile technologies do not have
profoundly changed search and purchase patterns in those segments yet. Third, this is the first
research within the customer journey domain that explicitly focuses on loyalty creation as an
4
important variable to measure the success of customer journey management (e.g., Kannan et al.
2016). Our results highlight segment-specific differences in the way journey satisfaction and
customer inspiration contribute to loyalty beyond product satisfaction.
Regarding managerial implications, our research informs retailers about how to manage the
five distinct customer segments along their path to purchase. For each of the segments, we
develop specific strategies on how to serve these customers and how to create customer loyalty.
Our results suggest that, for most of the segments, retailers can be selective in offering
touchpoints and thus allocate their budget accordingly. For the multiple touchpoint segment,
however, retailers need to be present in as many touchpoints as possible and create an inspiring
and seamless customer journey. While pleasing this segment is challenging for retailers, it might
be worth it because of the high spending level in the multiple touchpoint segment. Another
important insight of this study is that a showrooming segment is not evident in our data. This
suggests that this type of “free-rider problem,” where customers search in on retailer’s physical
stores and then purchase at another retailer online, may not be the biggest concern in current
retailing. In contrast, we identify one segment with strong webrooming behavior, which implies
that retailers are well-advised to attract customers online and to provide a seamless experience
from online touchpoints to their own physical store.
Theoretical Background and Previous Research
From Multi-Channel Retailing to Omni-Channel Retailing and Customer Journeys
Due to digitalization, research on consumer behavior across channels has changed dramatically
over the past decades. Initially, studies focused on one specific channel in isolation, such as the
catalog or the online channel. Subsequently, researchers began to examine several channels in
5
combination. From a multi-channel perspective, channels are defined as customer contact points
or the mediums through which the firm and the customer interact (Verhoef et al. 2015). By
emphasizing two-way interaction, the domain of channels excludes one-way communication,
such as TV or search engine marketing. From this perspective, multi-channel retailing studies
have investigated, for example, the integration of different channels (Herhausen et al. 2015) and
the cannibalization of channels (Pauwels and Neslin 2015).
Since researchers have begun to move from a multi-channel approach to a more journey-
focused approach by studying customer behavior within omni-channel retailing, the traditional
differentiation between two-way communication (interactive) channels and one-way
communication channels has become blurred (Verhoef et al. 2015). Currently, the definition of
channels is much broader in scope, and researchers often refer to them as touchpoints. Contrary
to channels, touchpoints encompass all types of one-way or two-way interactions between
customers and firms that involve any transactional or informational exchange, including
customer-to-customer interactions (Baxendale et al. 2015). In the following, we will use the term
touchpoints to explicitly broaden the scope of interactions that are part of the customer journey
and to include not only retailer-owned touchpoints but also competitor-owned touchpoints and
additional touchpoints (e.g., Lemon and Verhoef 2016; Neslin et al. 2014).
Studies in the context of digital advertising take a different journey perspective by
differentiating firm-initiated touchpoints (e.g., newsletter marketing or paid search) and
customer-initiated touchpoints (e.g., comparison portals or organic search). These studies
identify significant spillover effects from firm-initiated to customer-initiated touchpoints (Li and
Kannan 2014), and find that the contribution of firm-initiated touchpoints is underestimated
while the contribution of customer-initiated touchpoints is overestimated (Anderl et al. 2016b).
6
In this vein, the same studies also distinguish between paid search and organic search and find
that spillovers effects from paid to organic search are much stronger than in the reverse direction.
While abovementioned studies contribute significantly to our understanding of digital
touchpoints, their classification schemes do not apply to our research because they do not include
or classify offline touchpoints such as the physical store or the catalog. The only related study
that examines both online and offline touchpoints classifies them as brand-owned touchpoints,
competitor-owned touchpoints, and partner / third party touchpoints (Baxendale et al. 2015) – a
touchpoint classification scheme that is similar to the one applied in this research.
Defining the Customer Journey
Although the concept of customer journeys is one of the most recent and influential topics in
contemporary marketing (e.g., Edelman and Singer 2015; Marketing Science Institute 2018),
research on customer journeys already began in the 1960s with the buying process (Howard and
Sheth 1969). The buying process describes the journey in which customers move from need
recognition to purchase and evaluation of the purchased product. However, digitalization and the
associated proliferation of new touchpoints are changing this linear path to purchase into a much
more complex journey (Srinivasan, Rutz, and Pauwels. 2016). Today’s customers do not simply
travel from search to purchase using one or two touchpoints offered by the same retailer but
rather create their own journey that may include multiple different touchpoints (Grewal et al.
2016). Reflecting on these developments and in line with journey definitions in previous studies
(Anderl et al. 2016a; Baxendale et al. 2015; Lemon and Verhoef 2016), we define the customer
journey as customers’ search and purchase usage of all online and offline touchpoints from
various sources, including retailer-owned, competitor-owned, and additional touchpoints1. T
1 We acknowledge that the concept of the customer journey has been used in multiple contexts. Anderl et al. (2016)
defined the online customer journey to include all online touchpoints prior to a potential purchase decision. Lemon
7
Customer Experience and Customer Loyalty
The myriad of new touchpoints in the path-to-purchase provide customers with much more
options to design their own journey (Srinivasan et al. 2016), and retailers are challenged to not
lose their customers to competing firms along the journey (Lemon and Verhoef 2016).
Therefore, one of the major goals of customer experience management is to design journeys that
not only induce short-term sales, but also long-term customer loyalty (Homburg, Jozic, and
Kuehnl 2017). In the context of customer journeys, we define customer loyalty as a customer’s
intention to engage again in a journey of touchpoints provided by a given retailer (Homburg et
al. 2017) and to transit from post-purchase to repurchase at this retailer (Court et al. 2009). While
existing path-to-purchase studies fail to account for long-term effects of customer experience
along the journey (Lemon and Verhoef 2016), we aim to integrate the purchase funnel with the
loyalty funnel in order to understand both short-term behavioral and long-term attitudinal
consequences of designing the customer journey.
Specifically, we aim to empirically test the claim that customer loyalty formation, and,
thus, the effective management of customer experience within journeys, follows different rules in
different customer journey segments (Homburg et al. 2017; Lemon and Verhoef 2016). In
today’s highly competitive landscape, retailers must find ways to compete not only for their
products but also for the journey that customers travel when purchasing products (Grewal et al.
2009; Schmitt 2011). To analyze the customer experience conclusively, we will consider both
the perceived outcomes of the journey in terms of the product or consumption utility and the
perceived journey process, which is important for studying customer–retailer relationships
and Verhoef (2016) defined the customer journey as the process a customer goes through across all stages and
touchpoints that forms the customer experience. Baxendale et al. (2015) defined the customer journey as the
search process consisting of a number of discrete encounters with varying touchpoints.
8
(Lemon and Verhoef 2016). In addition, we examine the importance of inspiring customers
along the customer journey to build loyalty (Park, Eisingerich, and Park 2013).
Our conceptual framework for measuring loyalty formation through customer experiences
encompasses three components. Product satisfaction measures the evaluation of the purchased
product as an outcome of the journey. Journey satisfaction measures customers’ processing of
stimuli encountered during the journey, leading to a global affective evaluation of the journey.
Customer inspiration measures customers’ cognitive transformation of stimuli encountered
during the journey, leading to new cognitive insights. These three components may have
differing relationships with loyalty based on the varied characteristics of the customer journey.
For example, whereas journey satisfaction is associated with consistent experiences along
touchpoints that may contribute to loyalty (Lemon and Verhoef 2016), customer inspiration is
based on sensations of novelty and therefore may constitute a different connection with loyalty
(Böttger et al. 2017).
Prior Segmentation Studies Investigating Touchpoints in the Customer Journey
As summarized in Table 1, our segmentation approach builds on valuable insights from previous
studies that advance knowledge in the domain of touchpoint usage along the customer journey.
However, existing studies have adopted a multi-channel perspective to segment customers,
considering only the use of channels through which a specific firm and the customer interact
(typically the physical store, online store, and catalog). We broaden the concept of channels to a
journey-focused segmentation approach by segmenting customers based on touchpoint usage in
the search and purchase phases. Following an omni-channel perspective and focusing on
touchpoints, we include one-way and two-way interactions between customers and various firms
as well as customer-to-customer interactions and additional touchpoints in our analyses.
9
Early studies focused on the purchase phase and segmented customers based on the
purchase channel, considering the physical store, the online store, and/or the catalog as
alternatives (Bhatnagar and Ghose 2004; Keen et al. 2004; Knox 2005; Thomas and Sullivan
2005). Examining customer purchase behavior in multiple categories, these studies identified a
physical store segment consisting of customers who prefer to purchase offline and additional
segments consisting of customers who prefer to purchase products in the online store or the
catalog, depending on the alternatives considered. Some of these studies also found segments
formed by customers without a clear touchpoint preference for purchasing.
By including the search phase in their analysis, Konus, Verhoef, and Neslin (2008)
extended previous studies to a more encompassing view of the customer journey. Investigating
attitudes toward the physical store, the online store, and the catalog, the authors identified three
distinct segments. In line with the results of previous segmentation studies, store-focused
consumers consist of customers who prefer to search and purchase offline, and uninvolved
shoppers consist of customers without clear touchpoint preferences. Importantly, these authors
also found evidence of a new segment, multichannel enthusiasts. Customers in this segment have
a high preference for using multiple touchpoints during search and purchase.
De Keyser, Schepers, and Konus (2015) replicated the study by Konus et al. (2008) by
segmenting the touchpoint use of telecommunication customers and extended the scope of the
investigation by including the call center as an additional touchpoint.2 They identified four
distinct segments, including a store-focused segment that prefers to search and purchase offline,
a web-focused segment that prefers to search and purchase online, and a research shopper
2 We focus on the results of the search and purchase phases because the after-sales phase is less important for retail
customers compared to telecom customers and to enable comparison of results with all other segmentation studies.
Moreover, the six-segment solution based on search, purchase, and after-sales provided by De Keyser et al. (2015)
is nested within their four-segment solution based on search and purchase.
10
segment consisting of customers who prefer to search online or offline and purchase offline.
Furthermore, they found empirical evidence of a call-center-prone segment that prefers to search
online and purchase online or via the call center. The latter result exemplifies how the
consideration of a new touchpoint in the journey may combine or extend existing customer
segments. Notably, De Keyser et al. (2015) did not find a segment of uninvolved customers (i.e.,
customers without clear touchpoint preferences) and thus stress the growing importance for
retailers to actively manage multiple touchpoints along the customer journey.
In addition to the segmentation studies listed in Table 1, researchers have studied the
existence of more specific customer segments that were not derived from segmentation analyses.
Verhoef, Neslin, and Vroomen (2007) were the first to examine research shoppers, defined as
customers who use one touchpoint for search and another touchpoint for purchase. More
recently, researchers have distinguished between showrooming and webrooming as two distinct
types of research shopping (Gensler et al. 2017).
——— Insert Table 1 here ———
Mobile Devices in the Customer Journey
Although mobile usage is becoming more important in today’s customer journeys (e.g., Verhoef
et al. 2017), existing segmentation studies have largely overlooked mobile touchpoints, and only
recently researchers have investigated the role of mobile devices in the path to purchase. For
example, de Haan et al. (2018) and Xu et al. (2016) show that moving from a mobile device to a
desktop increases conversion. Both studies suggest that mobile devices are mainly used for
search and that they are important “journey starters”, even though many customers still use their
desktop or laptop for making purchases online. Researchers have also suggested that mobile
devices may be instrumental in fostering showrooming behavior (e.g., Gensler et al. 2017; Rapp
11
et al. 2015) because mobile devices can be used in the physical store to search for better options
online. Therefore, mobile devices can have a distinct impact on the customer journey, especially
in the search phase.
The question is whether this holds for all customer segments. Especially among segments
that move between online and offline touchpoints, the smartphone could be a valuable and
frequently used device. On the contrary, for a traditional store-focused segment, a mobile device
might be irrelevant. Another important question is whether a specific new segment will emerge
that relies predominantly on mobile touchpoints and that would be similar to the call center
prone segment from De Keyser et al. (2015). By including mobile usage in our segmentation
analyses, we provide insights into how mobile devices are used by different customer segments.
Research Model
While previous studies have contributed significantly to our understanding of touchpoint usage
along the customer journey, they (1) do not consider non-retailer-owned touchpoints; (2) do not
incorporate the usage of mobile devices as a segmentation criterion; and (3) do not relate
customer journeys to relevant outcomes. In this study, we address these gaps. Furthermore, we
explore additional journey characteristics, such as the duration of the journey and the number of
touchpoints used. In addition, we account for potential changes in customer journey segments by
collecting data at two points in time. Finally, we also test for segment-specific predictors of
customer loyalty. Figure 1 provides an overview of our research. We first identify distinct
customer journey segments (Part I) and then use the obtained results to derive and test
hypotheses on how antecedents of loyalty differ between the segments (Part II).
——— Insert Figure 1 here ———
12
Part I: Customer Journey Segments
Conceptual Development
In line with previous segmentation studies (Konus et al. 2008), we base our conceptual
development on anticipated utility theory (Quiggin 1982). Thus, we consider decision making in
the journey as a forward-looking process in which customers make decisions regarding the use of
certain touchpoints by considering the marginal utility that customers gain during their journey.
From the perspective of anticipated utility theory, journeys are a combination of touchpoints that
express customers’ assessment of the benefits and costs associated with each touchpoint to
maximize their utility. Since we consider a broader set of touchpoints during the search phase
and the use of mobile devices during the customer journey (as detailed in the measurement
section), we expect results that extend previous segmentation studies as summarized in Table 1.
Despite the rise of digital touchpoints, all studies have found an offline segment that
includes customers who prefer to search and purchase in a physical store. Moreover, most studies
have found an online segment of customers who prefer to search and purchase in an online store.
Some segmentation studies suggest additional segments. Konus et al. (2008) found a
multichannel segment consisting of customers with favorable attitudes toward multiple channels
for search and purchase. Similarly, we might expect a multiple touchpoint segment of customers
who use several different touchpoints for search and purchase. De Keyser et al. (2015) found a
research shopper segment of customers who prefer to search and purchase at different
touchpoints. Finally, De Keyser et al. (2015) introduced the call center channel and found a call-
center-prone segment of customers. Similarly, given that this is the first segmentation study to
consider mobile usage, we might find a mobile-prone segment of customers. In summary, based
13
on the outcomes of previous segmentation studies, we expect to find several segments of
customers that differ in their search and purchase behavior along the journey.
Based on anticipated utility theory, the usage of each touchpoint depends on the anticipated
utility for each individual customer. This anticipated utility in terms of, for example, monetary
savings and search costs is influenced by individual shopping goals and the shopping context (De
Keyser et al. 2015). Shopping goals can be explained by psychographic, sociodemographic, and
situational factors. Individual psychographic differences between customers should elicit
different benefits and costs from certain touchpoints, different marginal utilities, and thus
different touchpoint preferences and journey patterns. In line with prior research, we consider
price consciousness, time pressure, and involvement as psychographic covariates. We further
expect that anticipated utility from touchpoint usage can be predicted by different
sociodemographic characteristics (Konus et al. 2008), such as age, gender, income, education,
household size, and urbanization. In addition to these individual characteristics, we account for
other co-variates, allowing us to better understand the derived segments. First, we include the
duration of the customer journey, which should be related to the number of touchpoints used.
Second, we include multiple shopping-related variables, which are online and offline experience,
customer duration, buying frequency, and spending. We summarize our predictions for these
covariates in Table 2.
——— Insert Table 2 here ———
Data Collection
We followed Lemon and Verhoef’s (2016) recommendation to map the journey from the
customer’s perspective and collected survey data from a stratified sample of customers in
Austria, Germany, and Switzerland at two points in time, in 2013 and 2016. Both samples were
14
drawn randomly from the same population, with quotas for age and gender. An independent
panel provider collected the data with an online questionnaire, and respondents received
monetary compensation for participation (response rates were 80% and 81%, respectively).3 We
used the Critical Incident Technique and asked participants to reconstruct their last customer
journey at a multichannel retailer. In the course of this reconstruction, participants indicated at
which retailer they made the purchase, what they had bought, how much time had passed since
their purchase, which touchpoints they used, and whether or not they used a mobile device. To
minimize a potential recall bias, we presented customers with a predefined list of touchpoints.
Furthermore, we limited the interval between the purchase and study participation to a maximum
of three months to ensure that customers accurately remembered their journey.4 To address
potential misperception bias, we provided respondents with clear definitions of the various
touchpoints and extensively pretested our questionnaire.
In summary, we collected data on 2,780 individual journeys in 2013 and 3,105 individual
journeys in 2016 (the most frequent product categories were apparel, cosmetics, electronics,
entertainment, and groceries). We did not include journeys from the groceries category because
groceries differ from other categories due to a much higher buying frequency and a still
relatively dominant offline retail network. Less than 6% of European grocery shoppers use
online touchpoints in this category (Nielsen 2015). Thus, our final samples consisted of 2,443
journeys in 2013 and 2,649 journeys in 2016.
3 Given the anonymity of the data, we are unable to conduct within-subject analyses over time.
4 Similar to other studies on purchase decisions and search behavior, we rely on the recall of past behavior (e.g., De
Keyser et al. 2015; Heitmann, Lehmann, and Herrmann 2007; Ratchford, Lee, and Talukdar 2003). Thus,
following previous work, we tested whether “forgetting touchpoint usage” had a significant impact on the data by
splitting the sample into two groups: those who started their journey within the previous two months and those
who started their journey more than two months earlier. We did not find systematic differences in the use of
touchpoints across the two groups.
15
Measures
We segmented customers based on the use of specific touchpoints for search and purchase and
whether they used a mobile device during the customer journey, all captured with dummy
variables. The selection for the list of potential touchpoints was based on existing research, on
expert interviews in which we asked the upper management of multichannel retailers to report on
their most important touchpoints, and on insights from a regular retail customer survey starting
in 2011. In the course of this survey, we asked customers every three years to indicate their
usage of various touchpoints based on the list, and gave them the opportunity to add touchpoints
that were not included, thus continuously developing the list of touchpoints. These efforts
resulted in a list of the most common touchpoints for our questionnaire.
In the questionnaire, we followed a three-step process to assess touchpoints in the search
phase. First, we captured touchpoint usage by providing participants with three retailer-owned
touchpoints, three competitor-owned touchpoints, and seven additional touchpoints (see Table
3)5 and asked them to select all touchpoints that they used and to add touchpoints that were
missing in the list6. Second, we captured the moments of truth by confronting customers with all
touchpoints they used and by asking them to rate how important each individual visited
touchpoint was for their purchase decision. Third, we captured touchpoint sequences by, again,
confronting customers with all touchpoints they used and by asking them to assess the order in
which they had visited these touchpoints with the help of a drag-and-drop function (to account
for multiple touchpoint usage, touchpoints could be selected more than once). For purchase, we
5 The survey and expert interviews revealed that—contrary to insurance customers (De Keyser et al. 2015)—call
centers are not an important touchpoint for retailing customers.
6 Because of the restricted capacity of the LCA analysis to manage a multitude of different variables, the similarity
of some initial touchpoints, and the small usage rates, we had to merge touchpoints. Comparison portals include
price comparison portals and product rating portals, and social media include online communities, video portals,
image portals, blogs, and forums. Other touchpoints include all touchpoints that were used to seldom to justify
creating a separate category for them.
16
differentiated between a retailer’s offline touchpoint (physical store) and online touchpoint
(online store). In line with other recent studies (e.g., Xu et al. 2016; Wang, Malthouse, and
Krishnamurthi 2015), we captured the use of a mobile device during the journey with a separate,
binary variable which captures whether or not the customer has used the mobile device in the
course of the journey.
Active covariates. Relying on previous research, we included several covariates that may
influence segment membership (e.g., De Keyser et al. 2015; Konus et al. 2008). The rationale for
the covariates appears in Table 2, and all measures are provided in Web Appendix 1.
Outcomes. We measured product satisfaction with the scale from Crosby and Stephens
(1987; α = .88/.85), journey satisfaction with a scale based on Heitmann, Lehmann, and
Herrmann (2007; α = .85/.84), customer inspiration with a scale based on Böttger et al. (2017; α
= .88),7 and customer loyalty with the scale from Zeithaml, Berry, and Parasuraman (1996; α =
.89/.89). We also included a marker item to control for common method variance.8
Web Appendix 3 displays all correlations, and Web Appendix 4 describes the data in 2013
and 2016. Both datasets are comparable (all Cohen’s d ≤ .17), with the exception of mobile
device usage, which increased from 4% in 2013 to 19% in 2016. This increase is expected given
that mobile device usage along the customer journey is increasing rapidly (Shankar et al. 2016).
The use of mobile devices is significantly related to competitor-owned touchpoints (r = .12, p <
.01), additional touchpoints (r = .15, p < .01), and the number of touchpoints used (r = .32, p <
.01), indicating that mobile devices increase the number of alternatives searched.
7 Please note that we only measured customer inspiration in 2016.
8 We used principal component analysis to obtain the orthogonal factors from the multi-item scales. The results of
the exploratory factor analyses show that the expected solution explains 76% (75%) of variance (see Web
Appendix 2). Additional confirmatory factor analyses confirm our solutions: the goodness-of-fit index is .93 (.96),
the confirmatory fit index is .95 (.97), and the root mean squared error of approximation is .09 (.06). All squared
correlations were smaller than the average variance extracted, indicating discriminant validity. We used the three
items with the highest loadings for journey decision satisfaction, customer inspiration, and customer loyalty. We
thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.
17
——— Insert Table 3 here ———
Results of the Segmentation Analysis
We conducted latent class analyses (LCA) to identify different customer journey segments. We
present the LCA model, all analyses, and detailed results in Web Appendix 5. The LCA on both
the 2013 and 2016 data suggest a five-segment solution that is not affected by nationality.9 We
describe the main characteristics of each segment, covariates, the most important touchpoints,
and related segments from previous studies in Table 4.
As expected, we find empirical support for the existence of a store-focused segment of
customers who hardly ever switch channels throughout their journey. In line with existing
research, we find evidence for customers who predominantly search and purchase using online
touchpoints. However, contrary to existing research (e.g., De Keyser et al. 2015), our results
yield two distinct online segments and thus deliver a more nuanced view of these web-focused
customers. We label the first segment pragmatic online segment and the second segment
extensive online segment because the latter segment visits, on average, almost twice as many
touchpoints with a much higher usage rate of competitor online stores, search engines, and
comparison portals than the other online segment. Similar to previous studies (Konus et al.
2008), we also find a multiple touchpoint segment, which consists of customers who frequently
include competitor-owned and other touchpoints in their journey. We further find an online-to-
offline segment of customers who mainly search in online touchpoints but ultimately purchase at
the physical store. Therefore, our results indicate that shoppers far more often engage in online-
to-offline research shopping (i.e, webrooming) than in offline-to-online research shopping (i.e.,
9 We further used a K-means cluster analysis to confirm the LCA findings. The agglomeration coefficients suggests
five-segment solutions in both the 2013 and 2016 data. Despite being unable to control for covariates, 68% of
cases in 2013 and 69% of cases in 2016 were correctly classified.
18
showrooming).10 Finally, we do not find a designated mobile segment of customers who search
and purchase with their mobile phone.
Additional Characteristics of the Segments
Active covariates. We report the results for the covariates predicting segment membership
in Web Appendix 5, Table 5. The coefficients represent the impact of each covariate on
membership in each segment, compared to the store-focused segment as the reference category
because it is the most traditional segment in terms of touchpoint usage (e.g., Konus et al. 2008).
Therefore, a positive coefficient means that customers who score high on that antecedent are
more likely to appear in that segment, whereas a negative coefficient means customers are not
likely to be found in the segment. We summarize our findings in Table 4.
Mobile device usage across segments. Mobile device usage differs considerably across the
segments. The higher usage frequency of mobile devices within the customer journey is largely
driven by the multiple touchpoint segment (from 5% to 58%). The development within this
segment suggests that mobile usage will foster a parallel use of touchpoints rather than leading to
a decline in the usage of offline touchpoints. Though on a lower scale, mobile devices are also
used more often in the pragmatic online segment (from 5% to 16%), in the extensive online
segment (from 9% to 24%), and in the online-to-offline segment (from 1% to 12%). Customers
in the store-focused segment show no increasing usage of mobile devices (1% in both years).
Moments of truth across segments. We also analyzed whether the importance of
touchpoints differed between segments to identify the segment-specific moments of truth. The
perceived importance of all touchpoints differs significantly across segments (all F > 18.49, p <
.01; see Table 4 and Web Appendix 6), indicating that retailers must focus on different
10 Although we could not find evidence of a showrooming segment, 58% of customers in the multiple touchpoint
segment used a mobile device in their journey in 2016 and thus may engage in showrooming behavior.
19
touchpoints to successfully target distinct segments. For example, while the store-focused and
pragmatic online segments do not use search engines, the same touchpoint is important for the
extensive online, multiple touchpoint, and online-to-offline segments. In line with their journey,
the retailer’s physical store (online store) is the only important touchpoint for the pragmatic store
segment (pragmatic online segment). Similarly, for the extensive online segment, the touchpoints
that are visited most often (i.e., online store, competitor online store, and search engine) are also
crucial for the purchase decision. Interestingly, the online-to-offline segment value the physical
store most for their purchase decision while the most important touchpoint for the multiple
touchpoint segment is the online store.
Touchpoint sequences across segments. To further validate the obtained segments, we
explore segment-specific journey patterns in the 2016 data and display our findings in Table 5.
Given the complexity of the journey data, we limit our discussion to journey patterns that we
found in the journeys of at least 20 participants. Customers in the store-focused segment most
often search and purchase in the physical store of the focal retailer, while customers in the
pragmatic online segment most often search and purchase in the online store of the focal retailer.
Customers in the extensive online segment often search multiple additional and competitor
touchpoints before purchasing in the online store of the focal retailer. Customers in the multiple
touchpoint segment have more complex journeys that often span over more than six touchpoints.
Customers in the online-to-offline segment often switch touchpoints after searching competitor
touchpoints, additional touchpoints, or the retailer’s online store to purchase in the physical store
of the focal retailer. These prevailing touchpoint sequences across segments are in line with our
expectations and validate our interpretation of the five distinct customer journey segments.
——— Insert Table 4 and Table 5 here ———
20
Part II: Antecedents of Customer Loyalty across Segments
As discussed in our conceptual model, we focus on three measures of customer experience that
may have differing relationships with customers’ loyalty toward retailers depending on segment
membership and the number of touchpoints used (see Table 6 for an overview of predictions).
Product Satisfaction and Journey Satisfaction
The importance of product and journey satisfaction for loyalty depends on the utility that a
customer assigns to the evaluation of the search process versus the overall consumption
evaluation as determined by the outcome. Thus, the relationship of journey versus product
satisfaction and loyalty is conceptually related to the process- versus outcome-oriented
evaluation of the shopping experience. Process-oriented customers consider the quality of the
different steps involved in forming an evaluation, whereas outcome-oriented customers focus
only on the end-state as the consumption outcome (Thompson, Hamilton, and Pretrova 2009).
Therefore, the importance of the distinct facets of satisfaction for loyalty formation may differ
substantially among segments depending on the emphasis that customers in the different
segments put on the shopping process versus the shopping outcome. Similarly, variety seeking
and task orientation are often discussed as two complementary concepts for explaining
differences in customer journeys (e.g., Grewal, Levy, and Kumar 2009). Variety seeking is the
need to maintain an ideal level of stimulation in the form of novelty, complexity, or change
(Menon and Kahn 1995). Task orientation refers to the tendency to be highly goal-oriented and
focus on the requirements of the purchase task (Homburg, Müller, and Klarmann2011).
Customers who derive higher utility from using several touchpoints might be particularly
concerned with the process of decision-making because they seem to invest considerable time
21
and effort in information acquisition during different stages of the customer journey. Customers
in the multiple touchpoint segment use many different types of touchpoints. Therefore, they are
more likely to be concerned with enhancing the process that leads to a decision and to place a
higher emphasis on journey satisfaction. Product satisfaction is likely to have a comparably
smaller influence on loyalty for the multiple touchpoint segment because the exposure to
versatile sources of influence may make it unlikely for them to attribute their satisfaction with a
product to one specific retailer. Moreover, the outcome for these customers is likely to be less
diagnostic for an ex-post evaluation of the retailer than the journey itself. In addition, customers
in the multiple touchpoint segment may use different types of touchpoints to gain access to more
information and a broader assortment to maintain a high stimulation level associated with
variety-seeking. This is further indicated by the high usage of mobile devices. Accordingly,
multiple touchpoint-using customers will be more attached to retailers that help them to
maximize their journey satisfaction:
H1. Journey satisfaction has a stronger relationship with customer loyalty toward a retailer than
product satisfaction does for customers in the multiple touchpoint segment.
In contrast, the store-focused and pragmatic online segments are likely to have a stronger
orientation toward the outcome compared with the process. Customers in the store-focused
segment are characterized by their tendency to search and purchase products in the physical store
of a retailer. Their journey encompasses only two touchpoints on average and focuses mainly on
retailer-owned touchpoints. The journey of customers in the pragmatic online segment is equally
short, with two touchpoints on average. Furthermore, these customers are less likely to visit
touchpoints from other providers within their journey. This self-imposed reduction indicates a
low importance of the search process. Thus, customers from the store-focused and pragmatic
22
online segments should attribute purchase outcomes more directly to the retailer. In sum, both
segments are less likely to emphasize the journey and place more weight on the purchase:
H2. Product satisfaction has a stronger relationship with customer loyalty toward a retailer than
journey satisfaction does for customers in the (a) store-focused and (b) pragmatic online
segments.
The relative importance of journey versus product satisfaction in inducing loyalty is
ambiguous for the extensive online and online-to-offline segments. On the one hand, members of
these segments may use their customer journey to optimize the process and to achieve smart
shopper feelings, as reported by Verhoef et al. (2007). On the other hand, they may be concerned
with the outcome while switching touchpoints because the reduction of purchase uncertainty may
be an important shopping motive. Similarly, it is not straightforward to categorize their behavior
into variety-seeking or goal-orientation because, unlike the multiple touchpoint segment, they are
rather outcome-oriented. Thus, we do not expect to find significant differences in the
relationships between journey versus product satisfaction and loyalty for these two segments.
Therefore, we suggest that both components may play a substantial role:
H3. Both product satisfaction and journey satisfaction are positively related to customer loyalty
for customers in the (a) extensive online and (b) online-to-offline segments.
Customer Inspiration
In addition to product and journey satisfaction, recent research emphasizes customer inspiration
as an important predictor of retailer loyalty (e.g., Böttger et al. 2017). The relationship between
customer inspiration and loyalty may vary across segments because the sensory, affective,
intellectual, and behavioral aspects that shape customer inspiration may have different roles for
the distinct segments (Brakus, Schmitt, and Zarantonello 2009). A retailer’s physical store can
feature more inspirational content and better contribute to sensory experiences than online
23
touchpoints by enabling customers to try and experience new products (i.e., touching and feeling
the product; Kleinlercher et al. 2018). Thus, we expect that the store-focused segment will value
this inspirational more because this is clearly one of the advantages of the physical store.
Appealing to customers’ imagination is another important antecedent of customer
inspiration because it makes customers more receptive to new ideas (Böttger et al. 2017).
Therefore, we expect customer inspiration to be positively associated with loyalty for those
segments that value intellectual stimulation during the customer journey. Typical characteristics
of such customers are a strong interest in (1) thinking about topics in detail, (2) frequently using
their imagination, and (3) looking for information sources that stimulate curiosity (Brakus et al.
2009). Customers in the multiple touchpoint segment and the online-to-offline segment value the
acquisition of a vast amount of information from both online and offline touchpoints. This could
indicate that these customers look for inspiration along multiple touchpoints that may benefit
their customer experience on an intellectual or cognitive level. Furthermore, research indicates
that inspiration is more powerful among customers who are more capable of leaving their
habitual patterns behind because they are more open to new ideas and possibilities (Thrash and
Elliot 2003). The multiple touchpoint and online-to-offline segments are vivid examples of
shoppers who disrupt habitual patterns by switching between multiple touchpoints.
While we expect that customer inspiration will be positively associated with loyalty for the
store-focused, multiple touchpoint, and online-to-offline segments, we do not expect a positive
relationship for the extensive and pragmatic online segments. Customers in these latter segments
will be more interested in minimizing the effort of the journey process with online touchpoints
that are habitually used and warrant a sufficient outcome level (pragmatic online segments) or in
enhancing the shopping utility in terms of product satisfaction with online touchpoints for
24
product comparisons (extensive online segments). This outcome-oriented focus of both online
segments implies that these customers will be less receptive to inspirational stimuli because they
lack the cognitive capacity and commitment to let themselves be inspired:
H4. Customer inspiration has a positive relationship with customer loyalty for customers in the
(a) store-focused, (b) multiple touchpoint, and (c) online-to-offline segments but not for
customers in the (d) pragmatic online and (e) extensive online segments.
Number of Touchpoints
We predict that a higher number of touchpoints used moderates the relationship between
customer loyalty and product satisfaction, journey satisfaction, as well as customer inspiration. A
higher number of touchpoints in the customer journey is associated with more information
sources, a higher variety of information, and a stronger focus on the processing of information
(Lemon and Verhoef 2016). First, the more different information sources have contributed to the
purchase decision, the less consumers will attribute the purchase outcome to the retailer. This
weakens the relationship between purchase satisfaction and customer loyalty. Second, as
previously argued, a process-orientation is associated with a higher focus on the step-by-step
process leading to an outcome (Thompson et al. 2009). More steps within the customer journey
will foster a higher consideration of the process towards a decision, and therefore its evaluation,
the journey satisfaction, will more strongly determine customers' patronage decisions. Third, the
more touchpoints are used, the more stimuli are encountered, increasing the variety of
information. This means that the richness of the experience will provide more opportunities that
customer become inspired, and, therefore, customer inspiration will receive a higher weighting
for the relationship to retailers. To summarize:
H5. An increasing number of touchpoints during the customer journey (a) decreases the effect of
product satisfaction and increases the effects of (b) journey satisfaction and (c) customer
inspiration on customer loyalty.
25
Model and Analysis
We use the three-step method from Asparouhov and Muthén (2014) to model segment-specific
predictors of customer loyalty. We control for potential effects of sociodemographic,
psychographic, and other covariates and the product categories because they may affect customer
loyalty (e.g., Homburg et al. 2011). Thus, customer loyalty is predicted as follows:
(1)
=
ϲ + 1ϲ + 2ϲ + 3ϲ + ϲ + ϲ + ϲ + ϲ +
,
where CL is customer loyalty, PS is product satisfaction, JS is journey satisfaction, CI is
customer inspiration, PC are psychographic covariates, SC are sociodemographic covariates, OC
are other covariates, and CA are the categories. All coefficients αc, β1c, β2c, β3c, βic, βjc, βkc, and
β1c depend on the latent class variable C. We further analyze the same model for the full sample
without considering latent class membership C. Note that we only include customer inspiration
in the 2016 sample because this new construct was available only for the 2016 survey. We
further use the full sample to model number of touchpoints as a predictor of customer loyalty.
Results for the Predictors of Customer Loyalty
The estimates for the segment-specific predictors of customer loyalty are presented in Table 7
and Web Appendix 7. When considering the full samples, both product (β12013 = .28, p < .01;
β12016 = .32, p < .01) and journey satisfaction (β22013 = .21, p < .01; β22016 = .24, p < .01) are
significantly related to customer loyalty. Moreover, customer inspiration is significantly related
to customer loyalty (β3 = .07, p < .01).
Testing our hypotheses with segment-specific analyses reveals a more complex view of the
relationships among product satisfaction, journey satisfaction, customer inspiration, and
customer loyalty. For the multiple touchpoint segment, journey satisfaction is significantly
26
related to customer loyalty (β22013 = .58, p < .01; β22016 = .81, p < .01) but not to product
satisfaction (χ2diff_2013 = 8.55, p < .01; χ2diff_2016 = 37.42, p < .01), supporting H1.
For the store-focused segment, both product (β12013 = .43, p < .01; β12016 = .40, p < .01)
and journey satisfaction (β22013 = .14, p < .01; β22016 = .17, p < .01) are significantly related to
customer loyalty, with product satisfaction having a significantly higher parameter than journey
satisfaction (χ2diff_2013 = 6.67, p < .01; χ2diff_2016 = 4.94, p < .05), supporting H2a. For the
pragmatic online segment, both product (β12013 = .48, p < .01; β12016 = .52, p < .01) and journey
satisfaction (β22013 = .15, p < .01; β22016 = .20, p < .01) are significantly related to customer
loyalty, with product satisfaction having a significantly higher parameter than journey
satisfaction (χ2diff_2013 = 7.90, p < .01; χ2diff_2016 = 9.35, p < .01), supporting H2b.
For the extensive online segment, both product (β12013 = .26, p < .10) and journey
satisfaction (β22013 = .30, p < .01) are significantly related to customer loyalty in 2013 (χ2diff_2013
= .02, ns). However, in 2016, only product (β12016 = .33, p < .01) but not journey satisfaction
(β22016 = .02, ns) was significantly related to customer loyalty (χ2diff_2013 = 4.87, p < .05). Thus,
H3a is partially supported. For the online-to-offline segment, both product (β12013 = .39, p < .01;
β12016 = .37, p < .01) and journey satisfaction (β22013 = .17, p < .01; β22016 = .21, p < .01) are
significantly related to customer loyalty, with non-significant χ2 difference tests in both years.
Thus, H3b is fully supported.
When testing for the segment-specific effects of customer inspiration, we find support for
H4. Customer inspiration has a positive relationship with customer loyalty in addition to product
satisfaction and journey satisfaction for customers in the store-focused segment (H4a: β3 = .07, p
< .05), multiple touchpoint segment (H4b: β3 = .22, p < .01), and online-to-offline segment
(H4c: β3 = .08, p < .05). On the other hand, customer inspiration has no significant positive
27
relationship with customer loyalty for customers in the pragmatic online segment (H4d: β3 = .04,
ns) and extensive online segment (H4e: β3 = .01, ns).
Furthermore, we tested how the number of touchpoints influences the effects of product
satisfaction, journey satisfaction, and customer inspiration on customer loyalty. The estimates are
presented in Web Appendix 8. We find negative interaction effects of the number of touchpoints
used and product satisfaction (2013: β = -.06, p < .05; 2016: β = -.05, p < .05), non-significant
interaction effects of the number of touchpoints used and journey satisfaction (2013: β = .01, ns;
2016: β = .00, ns), and a positive interaction effect of the number of touchpoints used and
customer inspiration (β = .06, p < .05). These results suggest that the importance of product
satisfaction decreases while the importance of customer inspiration increases with the number of
touchpoints used in the journey. Thus, H5a and H5c are supported while H5b is not supported.
——— Insert Table 6 here ———
General Discussion
This study contributes to the emerging literature on customer journeys by conducting an in-depth
segmentation analysis of two samples of 2,443 and 2,649 journeys. Across both data sets, we
find strong evidence for the existence of five distinct journey segments that exist in all different
product categories: store-focused shoppers, pragmatic online shoppers, extensive online
shoppers, multiple touchpoint shoppers, and online-to-offline shoppers. These segments differ
considerably, among other things, in their touchpoint and mobile device usage, their segment-
specific covariates, and their journey patterns. The five segments remain unchanged in the two
data sets even though the usage of mobile devices has increased drastically. Moreover, we find
28
that the effects of product satisfaction, journey satisfaction and customer inspiration on customer
loyalty differ substantially between the five segments.
Theoretical Implications
The five identified customer journey segments contribute to the literature by complementing and
updating existing multi-channel segmentation schemes (see Table 1 and Table 4), and by
corroborating several findings from “digital-only” clickstream studies (Table 9). We extend
Konus et al.’s (2008) segment of “multichannel enthusiasts” by finding strong evidence for a
touchpoint-enthusiastic segment that consists of shoppers who extensively use different
touchpoints. The existence of the financially attractive multiple touchpoint segment is in line
with existing research that analyses customer clickstreams and find a positive relationship
between the amount of touchpoints used and the spending level (Mallapragada, Chandukala, and
Liu 2016). Nevertheless, since the number of touchpoints within the journey is negatively
associated with conversion probability (Anderl et al. 2016b), generating sales from multiple
touchpoint users might be a challenging task. This underscores the importance of customer
journey management to orchestrate all touchpoints of a retailer when targeting this segment.
Given that we also examined the use of external touchpoints, we were able to deliver
insights into the usage of non-retailer-owned touchpoints. Multiple-touchpoint users consider
several competitor-owned and additional touchpoints, which were also found to be crucial
elements of the customer journey in academic clickstream studies (Park 2017; Montgomery,
Srinivasan, and Liechty 2004). Contrary to Konus et al. (2008), we could not find evidence of a
segment of “uninvolved shoppers” characterized by no preference for any channel. Our inclusion
of more touchpoints, as well as our focus on the actual usage of touchpoints, may explain this
finding. The endurance of pragmatic store shoppers is interesting because it underlines the
29
importance of physical stores in times of increased usage of the Internet and mobile devices
(Shankar et al. 2016). We find a segment of store-focused customers that was also found in
multiple prior studies (Konus et al. 2008: De Keyser et al. 2015). This highlights the fact that
store-focused customers still play an important role in today’s digitalized market.
Furthermore, we extend more recent segmentation research that highlighs the existence of
a web-focused segment (De Keyser et al. 2015). However, while previous research did not
differentiate among different web-focused shoppers, we find evidence of two distinct online
segments: pragmatic online shoppers and extensive online shoppers. This finding is in line with
clickstream evidence on the existence of two different groups of digital shoppers. One group
uses only one or two touchpoints in their journey and the other uses multiple touchpoints (Park
2017). While pragmatic online shoppers rarely visit competitor-owned and additional
touchpoints, extensive online shoppers show an extensive usage of different touchpoints. This
suggest that retailers need to address web-focused shoppers differently according to their
segment-specific preferences and characteristics.
We also find further support for the existence of a research shopper segment (Verhoef et al.
2007). Interestingly, we identify a segment of online-to-offline shoppers that mainly searches
online and always purchases offline, but we do not find a dedicated showrooming segment.
Although surprising, the lack of a showrooming segment is in line with previous segmentation
studies (Konus et al. 2008, De Keyser et al. 2015) and recent industry reports (Sopadjieva et al.
2017) that indicate that shoppers far more often engage in “reverse showrooming” (i.e.,
webrooming) than in showrooming. Although some multiple touchpoint shoppers may engage in
showrooming behavior (as indicated by frequent use of the physical store for searching together
with an increase in online purchases and an increase in the usage of mobile devices), our results
30
indicate that the threat of showrooming in the form of a “free-riding behavior” may be overrated
for multichannel retailers. On the contrary, research on webrooming behavior and retailers’
possibilities to steer online shoppers to their physical stores requires more attention.
Contrary to previous segmentation studies, we also included the usage of mobile devices in
our segmentation analyses. The increasing importance of mobile devices raises the question of
whether mobile devices conflate shopper behavior and existing journey segments (e.g., Lemon
and Verhoef 2016). Since we collected cross-sectional data at two points in time from
comparable samples of shoppers who differed in mobile device usage, we were able gain insight
into this question. In line with Rapp et al. (2015), we find that mobile device usage is associated
with the number of alternatives searched. This finding indicates that mobile devices indeed
facilitate information search. However, we find no evidence that mobile devices conflate any of
the five journey segments or lead to a “mobile-only” segment. Instead of replacing other
touchpoints, mobile devices are used as an additional search channel (in line with clickstream
studies; e.g., de Haan et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2016). Thus, mobile is complementary to other
touchpoints and highly prevalent only in the multiple touchpoint segment and, to a lesser extent,
in the extensive online segment.11 Given the rise of the Internet of Things (Verhoef et al. 2017),
future customer journey segments may be even more determined by mobile devices.
Investigating the segment-specific effects of customer experience on customer loyalty
explicitly addresses the need for research on loyalty effects in the path to purchase (e.g., Kannan
et al. 2016). It also extends prior multi-channel segmentation studies that mainly focus on
identifying the segments rather than how these segments should be treated differently to create
loyalty. While journey satisfaction is more important than product satisfaction for multiple
11 Note that we should be careful in drawing strong causal conclusions because we cannot follow customers over
time given the analysis of two independent cross-sectional data sets.
31
touchpoint shoppers and both are equally important for online-to-offline shoppers, product
satisfaction still prevails over journey satisfaction for store-focused shoppers, pragmatic online
shoppers, and extensive online shoppers. Importantly, we also included the relatively new
construct of customer inspiration as an antecedent of loyalty. For customers in the multiple
touchpoint and online-to-offline segments, customer inspiration explains customer loyalty in
addition to product and journey satisfaction. Importantly, customer inspiration is also positively
related to loyalty for the store-focused segment, which emphasizes the need for physical stores to
inspire customers. The distinct characteristics and loyalty antecedents of the five segments can
help retailers develop segment-specific customer journey strategies, which we will discuss next.
Managerial Implications
Our findings contribute substantially to managerial practice since the existence of five distinct
and stable customer journey segments across multiple shopping categories enables retailers to
develop segment-specific marketing strategies. We summarize the moments of truth, loyalty
antecedents, and strategic recommendations in Table 8. We clearly show how each segment
should be served along different touchpoints in different phases of the journey. For example,
when targeting the extensive online segment, it is important for retailers to keep these customers
in the retailers’ own online store. An option could be to provide immediate attractive offers
during the journey that seduce this segment to purchase the required product. For the multiple
touchpoint segment, it is important to be present in as many available touchpoints as possible.
Satisfying and inspiring these customers in the journey is very important but more costly for the
retailer. For each segment, we present important recommendations in the last column of Table 8.
Because we find significant differences in average spending and customer loyalty, our
segmentation scheme and the segment-specific insights have clear managerial value.
32
Beyond the segment-specific recommendations in Table 8, we provide additional relevant
implications to retailers. The lack of a showrooming segment indicates that the threat of
showrooming may be overrated. However, we find that webrooming is a consistent behavior
over time. Retailers should expand their online marketing efforts if they want to reach out to
online-to-offline shoppers and provide specific incentives to move shoppers to the offline store.
For instance, retailers could offer the delivery of online purchases to their physical stores
(Herhausen et al. 2015). In doing so, they attract customers to their physical stores, benefit from
the inspirational potential of physical stores, and increase the potential of cross-selling.
Importantly, our analyses also identified the moments of truth in the customer journey.
While some practitioners propagate the “zero moment of truth” of search engines (Lecinski
2011), our results provide a more nuanced view. Although search engines are also the most
important of all additional touchpoints in our sample, our analyses reveal that retailer-owned
touchpoints are still more important for making the purchase decision. Interestingly, this finding
also holds for the multiple touchpoint segment, whose members reveal the strongest switching
behavior. This observation is in line with clickstream research that attributes the highest
conversion probability to firm-owned touchpoints (Li and Kannan 2014). Thus, retailers should
invest in their own touchpoints to attract, inspire, and retain customers from different segments.
——— Insert Table 7 here ———
Limitations and Directions for Future Research
Although our research is based on a large data collection at two points in time across multiple
retailers and product categories and we were able to replicate the segments and results in both
samples, our study has some limitations that offer promising directions for future research. First,
in line with other studies of actual channel usage (De Keyser et al. 2015; Kushwaha and Shankar
33
2013), we were able to examine only completed customer journeys. However, given that we
asked a random sample of participants to reconstruct their last journey that ended with a
purchase, we believe that the insights generated may still be generalized.
We note that academic studies examining completed and interrupted online customer
journeys with the help of customer clickstream data report many similarities to our findings
(Table 9), thus increasing the confidence in our results. Furthermore, the anonymity of
participants prevented us from collecting behavioral data on customer loyalty. Although using an
intentional measure of customer loyalty is in line with other studies (e.g., Homburg et al. 2011),
it would have been desirable to complement our measurement with objective sales data. In
addition, we did not examine post-purchase touchpoints of the customer journey. While the
usage of post-purchase touchpoints is rare among retail customers, we strongly encourage
researchers to investigate the role of post-purchase touchpoints in service settings. In addition,
we were not able to differentiate between firm-initiated vs. customer-initiated digital touchpoints
such as organic vs. paid search or paid content vs. user generated content in our data, and we
could not capture mobile phone usage in more detail . We urge future research to do so when
investigating customer journeys. Another potential research direction arises from our static
analysis. Thus, we call for longitudinal research that studies how customer journeys change over
time within specific customer segments.
34
References
Anderl, E., Schumann, J. H., & Kunz, W. (2016a). Helping firms reduce complexity in
multichannel online data: a new taxonomy-based approach for customer journeys. Journal
of Retailing, 92, 185-203.
Anderl, E., Becker, I., Von Wangenheim, F., & Schumann, J. H. (2016b). Mapping the customer
journey: Lessons learned from graph-based online attribution modeling. International
Journal of Research in Marketing, 33, 457-474.
Asparouhov, T., & Muthén, B. (2014). Auxiliary variables in mixture modeling: three-step
approaches using M plus. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 21,
329-341.
Baxendale, S., Macdonald, E. K., & Wilson, H. N. (2015). The impact of different touchpoints
on brand consideration. Journal of Retailing, 91, 235-253.
Bhatnagar, A., & Ghose, S. (2004). A latent class segmentation analysis of e-shoppers. Journal
of Business Research, 57, 758-767.
Böttger, T., Rudolph, T., Evanschitzky, H., & Pfrang, T. (2017). Customer inspiration:
Conceptualization, scale development, and validation. Journal of Marketing, 81(6), 116-
131.
Brakus, J. J., Schmitt, B. H., & Zarantonello, L. (2009). Brand experience: What is it? How is it
measured? Does it affect loyalty?. Journal of Marketing, 73, 52-68.
Court, D., Elzinga, D., Mulder, S. & Vetvik, O. J. (2009). The consumer decision journey.
McKinsey Quarterly, 3, 96–107.
35
Crosby, L. A., & Stephens, N. (1987). Effects of relationship marketing on satisfaction,
retention, and prices in the life insurance industry. Journal of Marketing Research, 24,
404-411.
de Haan, E., Kannan, P. K., Verhoef, P. C., & Wiesel, T. (2018). Device switching in online
purchasing: Examining the strategic contingencies. Journal of Marketing, forthcoming.
De Keyser, A., Schepers, J., & Konuş, U. (2015). Multichannel customer segmentation: does the
after-sales channel matter? A replication and extension. International Journal of Research
in Marketing, 32, 453-456.
Edelman, D. C., & Singer, M. (2015). Competing on customer journeys. Harvard Business
Review, 93, 88-100.
Gensler, S., Neslin, S. A., & Verhoef, P. C. (2017). The showrooming phenomenon: It’s more
than just about price. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 38, 29-43.
Gensler, S., Verhoef, P. C., & Böhm, M. (2012). Understanding consumers’ multichannel
choices across the different stages of the buying process. Marketing Letters, 23, 987-1003.
Grewal, D., Roggeveen, A. L., & Nordfält, J. (2016). Roles of retailer tactics and customer-
specific factors in shopper marketing: Substantive, methodological, and conceptual issues.
Journal of Business Research, 69, 1009-1013.
Grewal, D., Levy, M., & Kumar, V. (2009). Customer experience management in retailing: an
organizing framework. Journal of Retailing, 85, 1-14.
Heitmann, M., Lehmann, D. R., & Herrmann, A. (2007). Choice goal attainment and decision
and consumption satisfaction. Journal of Marketing Research, 44, 234-250.
36
Herhausen, D., Binder, J., Schoegel, M., & Herrmann, A. (2015). Integrating bricks with clicks:
retailer-level and channel-level outcomes of online–offline channel integration. Journal of
Retailing, 91, 309-325.
Homburg, C., Jozić, D., & Kuehnl, C. (2017). Customer experience management: toward
implementing an evolving marketing concept. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, 45, 377-401.
Homburg, C., Müller, M., & Klarmann, M. (2011). When does salespeople’s customer
orientation lead to customer loyalty? The differential effects of relational and functional
customer orientation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 39, 795–812.
Howard, J. A. & Sheth, J. (1969). The theory of buyer behavior. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Inman, J. J., Shankar, V., & Ferraro, R. (2004). The roles of channel-category associations and
geodemographics in channel patronage. Journal of Marketing, 68, 51-71.
Kannan, P. K., Reinartz, W., & Verhoef, P. C. (2016). The path to purchase and attribution
modeling. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 33, 449-456.
Keen, C., Wetzels, M., De Ruyter, K., & Feinberg, R. (2004). E-tailers versus retailers: which
factors determine consumer preferences? Journal of Business Research, 57, 685-695.
Kleijnen, M., De Ruyter, K., & Wetzels, M. (2007). An assessment of value creation in mobile
service delivery and the moderating role of time consciousness. Journal of Retailing, 83,
33-46.
Kleinlercher, K., Emrich, O., Herhausen, D., Verhoef, P. C., & Rudolph, T. (2018). Websites as
information hubs: How informational channel integration and shopping benefit density
interact in steering customers to the physical store. Journal of the Association for
Consumer Research, online first.
37
Knox, G. A. (2005). Modelling and managing customers in a multichannel setting. University of
Pennsylvania.
Konus, U., Verhoef, P. C., & Neslin, S. A. (2008). Multichannel shopper segments and their
covariates. Journal of Retailing, 84, 398-413.
Kumar, V., & Venkatesan, R. (2005). Who are the multichannel shoppers and how do they
perform? Correlates of multichannel shopping behavior. Journal of Interactive Marketing,
19, 44-62.
Kushwaha, T., & Shankar, V. (2013). Are multichannel customers really more valuable? The
moderating role of product category characteristics. Journal of Marketing, 77, 67-85.
Lemon, K. N., & Verhoef, P. C. (2016). Understanding customer experience throughout the
customer journey. Journal of Marketing, 80, 69-96.
Lecinski, J. (2011). ZMOT: Winning the zero moment of truth. Google.
Li, J., Konus, U., Pauwels, K., & Langerak, F. (2015). The hare and the tortoise: Do earlier
adopters of online channels purchase more? Journal of Retailing, 91, 289-308.
Li, H., & Kannan, P. K. (2014). Attributing conversions in a multichannel online marketing
environment: An empirical model and a field experiment. Journal of Marketing Research,
51, 40-56.
Mallapragada, G., Chandukala, S. R., & Liu, Q. (2016). Exploring the effects of “what”(product)
and “where”(website) characteristics on online shopping behavior. Journal of Marketing,
80, 21-38.
Marketing Science Institute (2018). Research priorities 2018-2020. Cambridge, MA.
Menon, S., & Kahn, B. E. (1995). The impact of context on variety seeking in product choices.
Journal of Consumer Research, 22, 285-295.
38
Montgomery, A. L., Li, S., Srinivasan, K., & Liechty, J. C. (2004). Modeling online browsing
and path analysis using clickstream data. Marketing Science, 23, 579-595.
Narang, U., & Shankar, V. (2016). The effects of mobile apps on shopper purchases and product
returns. Available at SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2878903.
Neslin, S. A., Jerath, K., Bodapati, A., Bradlow, E. T., Deighton, J., Gensler, S., Lee, L.,
Montaguti, E., Telang, R., Venkatesan, R., Verhoef, P. C., & Zhang, Z. J. (2014). The
interrelationships between brand and channel choice. Marketing Letters, 25, 319-330.
Nielsen, N. V. (2015). The future of grocery: E-commerce, digital technology and changing
shopping preferences around the world. https://www.nielsen.com/content/dam.
Nylund-Gibson, K., Grimm, R., Quirk, M., & Furlong, M. (2014). A latent transition mixture
model using the three-step specification. Structural Equation Modeling: A
Multidisciplinary Journal, 21, 439-454.
Park, C. H. (2017). Online purchase paths and conversion dynamics across multiple websites.
Journal of Retailing, 93, 253-265.
Park, C. W., Eisingerich, A. B., & Park, J. W. (2013). Attachment–aversion (AA) model of
customer–brand relationships,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 23, 229-48.
Pauwels, K., & Neslin, S. A. (2015). Building with bricks and mortar: The revenue impact of
opening physical stores in a multichannel environment. Journal of Retailing, 91, 182-197.
Quiggin, J. (1982). A theory of anticipated utility. Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 3, 323–343.
Rapp, A., Baker, T. L., Bachrach, D. G., Ogilvie, J., & Beitelspacher, L. S. (2015). Perceived
customer showrooming behavior and the effect on retail salesperson self-efficacy and
performance. Journal of Retailing, 91, 358–369.
39
Ratchford, B. T., Lee, M. S., & Talukdar, D. (2003). The impact of the internet on information
search for automobiles. Journal of Marketing Research, 40, 193-209.
Schmitt, B. (2011). Experience marketing: concepts, frameworks and consumer insights.
Foundations and Trends® in Marketing, 5, 55-112.
Shankar, V., Kleijnen, M., Ramanathan, S., Rizley, R., Holland, S., & Morrissey, S. (2016).
Mobile shopper marketing: Key issues, current insights, and future research avenues.
Journal of Interactive Marketing, 34, 37-48.
Sopadjieva, E., Dholakia, U. M., & Benjamin, B. (2017). A study of 46,000 shoppers shows that
omnichannel retailing works. https://hbr.org/2017/01/astudy-of-46000-shoppers-shows-
that-omnichannel-retailing-works.
Srinivasan, S., Rutz, O. J., & Pauwels, K. (2016). Paths to and off purchase: quantifying the
impact of traditional marketing and online consumer activity. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 44, 440-453.
Strebel, J., Erdem, T., & Swait, J. (2004). Consumer search in high technology markets:
Exploring the use of traditional information channels. Journal of Consumer Psychology,
14, 96-104.
Thomas, J. S., & Sullivan, U. Y. (2005). Managing marketing communications with
multichannel customers. Journal of Marketing, 69, 239-251.
Thompson, D. V., Hamilton, R.W., & Petrova, P.K (2009). When mental simulation hinders
behavior: the effects of process-oriented thinking on decision difficulty and performance.
Journal of Consumer Research, 36, 562-574.
Thrash, T. M., & Elliot, A. J. (2003). Inspiration as a psychological construct. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 871-889.
40
van Nierop, J. E., Leeflang, P. S., Teerling, M. L., & Huizingh, K. E. (2011). The impact of the
introduction and use of an informational website on offline customer buying behavior.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 28, 155-165.
Verhoef, P. C., Kannan, P. K., & Inman, J. J. (2015). From multi-channel retailing to omni-
channel retailing: introduction to the special issue on multi-channel retailing. Journal of
Retailing, 91, 174-181.
Verhoef, P. C., Lemon, K. N., Parasuraman, A., Roggeveen, A., Tsiros, M., & Schlesinger, L. A.
(2009). Customer experience creation: determinants, dynamics and management strategies.
Journal of Retailing, 85, 31-41.
Verhoef, P. C., Neslin, S. A., & Vroomen, B. (2007). Multichannel customer management:
understanding the research-shopper phenomenon. International Journal of Research in
Marketing, 24, 129-148.
Verhoef, P. C., Stephen, A. T., Kannan, P. K., Luo, X., Abhishek, V., Andrews, M., Bart, Y.,
Datta, H., Fong, N., Hoffmann, D. L., Hu, M. M., Novak, T., Rand, W., Zhang, Y. (2017).
Consumer connectivity in a complex, technology-enabled, and mobile-oriented world with
smart products. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 40, 1-8.
Wang, R. J. H., Malthouse, E. C., & Krishnamurthi, L. (2015). On the go: how mobile shopping
affects customer purchase behavior. Journal of Retailing, 91, 217-234.
Xu, K., Chan, J., Ghose, A., & Han, S. P. (2016). Battle of the channels: The impact of tablets on
digital commerce. Management Science, 63, 1469-1492.
Zeithaml, V. A., Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. (1996). The behavioral consequences of
service quality. Journal of Marketing, 60, 31-46.
41
Table 1: Segmentation Studies Investigating Customer Journeys
Study Phases Touchpoints Characteristics Outcomes Sample Method Segments
This Study Search,
purchase
Physical store, online
store, catalog,
competitor physical
store, competitor online
store, competitor
catalog, search engine,
brand website,
comparison portal,
social media
community, news
portal, word of mouth
Physical store, online
store, call center
Duration of
journey, use of
mobile device,
number of
touchpoints,
importance of
touchpoints,
sequences of
touchpoints
Product
satisfaction,
journey
satisfaction,
customer
inspiration,
customer
loyalty
Two data sets:
T1: 2,443 DACH
customers from
multiple categories
T2: 2,649 DACH
customers from
multiple categories
— — 314 Dutch telecom
customers
LCA 1. Store-focused shoppers (22% | 24%)
2. 3. 4. 5. Pragmatic online shoppers (23% | 22%)
Extensive online shoppers (21% | 13%)
Multiple touchpoint shoppers (13% | 14%)
Online-to-offline shoppers (20% | 26%)
De Keyser et al.
2015a
Search,
purchase,
after-sales
Konus et al. 2008b Search,
purchase
Physical store, online
store, catalog
Knox 2005 Purchase Online store, catalog — — 1,819 US
Thomas and
Sullivan 2005
Bathnagar and
Ghose 2004
Purchase Physical store, online
store, catalog
Purchase Physical store, online
store
Keen et al. 2004 Purchase Physical store, online
store, catalog
— — 364 Dutch
customers from
multiple categories
customers (not
specified)
— — 4,162 US
customers from
multiple categories
— — 1,330 US
customers from
multiple categories
— — 281 US electronics
customers
LCA 1. Research shopper (46%)
2. Web-focused shoppers (31%)
3. Store-focused shoppers (19%)
4. Call center-prone shoppers (4%)
LCA 1. Uninvolved shoppers (40%)
2. Multichannel enthusiasts (37%)
3. Store-focused consumers (23%)
LCA LCA LCA Cluster
analysis
1. Migration segment (58%) [online]
2. Offline segment (42%) [physical store]
1. Segment 1 (27%) [catalog]
2. Segment 2 (73%) [physical store]
1. Segment 1 (23%) [no general preference]
2. Segment 2 (69%) [physical store]
3. Segment 3 (8%) [online]
1. Generalists (34%) [no general preference]
2. Formatters (16%) [physical store]
3. Price sensitives (26%) [online or catalog]
4. Experiencers (24%) [no preference]
Note: DACH = Germany, Austria, Switzerland. LCA = latent class analysis. We use the term “touchpoints” to explicitly broaden the scope of channels by
including additional interactions that are part of the customer journey (e.g., Lemon and Verhoef 2016; Verhoef et al. 2015).
aWe report the search and purchase solution because after-sales is less important for retail customers compared to telecom customers and to enable comparison
with the results of the other studies. Moreover, the six-segment solution based on search, purchase, and after-sales is nested within the four-segment solution.
bThis study measures attitudes toward touchpoints on a 5-point Likert scale, and all other studies measure touchpoint usage status (Yes/No).
42
Table 2: Overview of Predictions for Covariates
Covariate Prediction and Selected References
Psychographic Covariates
Price
Consciousness
Price-conscious customers are more likely to belong to segments that use more touchpoints to learn where they
can have the best price and that switch between their own and competitive touchpoints to gain information about
potential cost savings (Gensler et al. 2017, Konus et al. 2008, Rapp et al. 2015).
Time Pressure Customers with time pressure are more likely to belong to segments that use only few touchpoints because time
is a scarce resource for them and hence they do not want to use multiple touchpoints to search extensively
(Kleijnen, De Ruyter, and Wetzels 2007).
Involvement Customers with higher involvement are more likely to belong to segments that use more and more diverse
touchpoints given their high involvement in the buying process, which creates benefits to shop by using more
touchpoints (De Keyser et al. 2015).
Sociodemographic Covariates
Age Older customers are more likely to belong to segments that use few and primarily physical touchpoints and that
have a lower usage of mobile devices (Kushwaha and Shankar 2013; Wang, Malthouse, and Krishnamurthi
2015).
Gender Male customers are more likely to belong to segments that use many and more innovative touchpoints because
they are more inclined to try new touchpoints (Li et al. 2015; Narang and Shankar 2016; Strebel, Erdem, and
Swait 2004).
Income Customers with higher income may be more likely to belong to segments that use many touchpoints because
income may signal the means to shop across a variety of touchpoints. Alternatively, these customers may be
more likely to belong to segments that use fewer touchpoints because it may also signal that customers are less
price focused (Konus et al. 2008; Kumar and Venkatesan 2005; van Nierop et al. 2011).
Education Customers with a higher education are more likely to belong to segments that use a larger number of and more
diverse touchpoints because they possess sufficient analytical training to extract the benefits of an extensive
search of multiple touchpoints (Kumar and Venkatesan 2005; van Nierop et al. 2011; Strebel et al. 2004).
Household Size Customers with a higher household size are more likely to belong to segments that use a larger number of and
more diverse touchpoints because they may strive for the best deal and may need to take into account the
preferences of more members, leading to a more extensive search across touchpoints (Kushwaha and Shankar
2013).
Urbanization Customers from urban regions are more likely to belong to segments that use primarily physical touchpoints
because urbanization may increase the availability of and reduce the distance to physical touchpoints (Inman,
Shankar, and Ferraro 2004; Konus et al. 2008).
Other Covariates
Duration of
Journey
Customers with a longer journey duration are more likely to belong to segments that use many touchpoints
because shorter journeys will be more focused and are likely to include less touchpoints (Lemon and Verhoef
2016).
Online Channel
Customers with higher online channel experience are more likely to belong to segments that use primarily
Experience
online touchpoints because channel experience may drive customers to use the same channel over time as well
as to stay within the same channel (Gensler, Verhoef, and Böhm 2012).
Physical
Channel
Experience
Customer
Duration
Customers with higher physical channel experience are more likely to belong to segments that use primarily
physical touchpoints because channel experience may drive customers to use the same channel over time as well
as to stay within the same channel (Gensler et al. 2012).
Customers with a longer customer duration are more likely to belong to segments that use few and primarily
physical touchpoints because a long customer history may predict use of store-focused touchpoints (Konus et al.
2008).
Buying
Frequency
Customers with a higher buying frequency are more likely to belong to segments that use few touchpoints
because a higher buying frequency may lead to a less extensive search and comparison across different
touchpoints (Kushawa and Shankar 2013).
Spending Customers with higher spending are more likely to belong to segments that use many touchpoints because
higher spending may lead to a more extensive search and comparison across different touchpoints (Kushawa
and Shankar 2013).
Note: We do not include specific hypotheses because we determine the segments ex-post in latent class analyses.
43
Table 3: Touchpoints Considered for Search and Purchase in the Customer Journey Analysis
Touchpoint Online vs. Offline Definition Example (Purchase of Apple iPhone at Best Buy)
Search Phase
Retailer Touchpoints
Physical store Online store Offline Online Physical store operated by the retailer. Visiting a Best Buy physical store.
Online store operated by the retailer. Visiting the Best Buy online store.
Catalog Offline Catalog dispatched by the retailer. Consulting a Best Buy catalog.
Competitor Touchpoints
Competitor physical store Offline Physical store operated by a competitor. Visiting a physical WalMart store.
Competitor online store Online Online store operated by a competitor. Visiting www.amazon.com.
Competitor catalog Offline Catalog dispatched by a competitor. Consulting a Target catalog.
Additional Touchpoints
Search engine Online Sear engine operated by a third party. Searching for the term “Apple iPhone” at google or
Brand website Online Website of the manufacturer of a product. Visiting the apple website to get information about the
Comparison portal Online Price or product comparison portal of a third
yahoo.
iPhone.
iPhone.
Using PriceGrabber to compare prices of the Apple
party.
Social media Online Social media site operated by a third party (e.g.,
community, blog, social networking service).
News portals / newspaper Online / Offline News provided by a third party online or
offline.
Offline word of mouth Offline Product-related offline conversations among
customers.
Other touchpoints Online / Offline Touchpoints not grouped in any of the other
categories due to low usage of customers.
Following a discussion on the Apple iPhone in Facebook.
Reading an article in The New York Times or on
www.nytimes.com about the Apple iPhone.
Speaking with family members and friends about the
functionality of the Apple iPhone.
Hearing about the Apple iPhone in a radio commercial.
Purchase Phase
Physical store Online store Offline Online Physical store operated by the retailer. Online store operated by the retailer. Buying at a Best Buy physical store.
Buying at the Best Buy online store.
Note: We build our classification of retailer-owned, competitor-owned, and additional touchpoints on Lemon and Verhoef (2016). Other studies use paid-owned-earned classifications (Srinivasan et al.
2016) or customer-, firm- or other-initiated classifications (Li and Kannan, 2014; Anderl et al. 2016). However, in contrast to these studies that only consider online touchpoints, we include both online
and offline touchpoints in our study. As a result, other potential classifications would only relate to a subset of our touchpoints.
44
Table 4: Summary of Segmentation Results
Segment Main Characteristics Covariates Related Segments
Store-
Focused
Segment
Pragmatic
Online
Segment
Extensive
Online
Segment
Multiple
Touchpoint
Segment
Online-to-
Offline
Segment
Customers in the store-focused segment use only two touchpoints
for searching (2.22 and 2.01), have the lowest share of online
touchpoints in the search phase (17% and 15%), and always
purchase in the physical store. Only 1% of store-focused
customers use mobile devices.
Customers in the pragmatic online segment use only two
touchpoints for searching (2.36 and 2.29), have a high share of
online touchpoints in the search phase (79% and 80%), and almost
always purchase in the online store (99% and 99%). Mobile device
usage increased from 5% to 16%.
Customers in the extensive online segment use four touchpoints
for searching (4.38 and 3.92), have the highest share of online
touchpoints in the search phase (87% and 93%), and almost
always purchase in the online store (100% and 99%). Mobile
device usage increased from 9% to 24%.
Customers in the multiple touchpoint segment use the most
touchpoints for searching (6.87 and 6.81), have an average share
of online touchpoints in the search phase (61% and 67%), and
increasingly purchase in the online store (45% and 78%). Mobile
device usage increased drastically from 5% to 58%.
Customers in the online-to-offline segment use four touchpoints
for searching (4.07 and 4.57), and have an average share of online
touchpoints in the search phase (60% and 60%). The physical store
of the focal retailer is always used for purchase. Mobile device
usage increased from 1% to 12%.
Store-focused shoppers have less online
experience and spend less than customers
from other segments.
Store-focused consumers
(De Keyser et al. 2015; Konus
et al. 2008)
Pragmatic online shoppers are older, more
often female, have a shorter journey duration,
more online and less offline experience, and
spend more than store-focused customers.
New segment
Extensive online shoppers are more price
consciousness and more often male, have a
higher education, more online and less offline
experience, and a shorter customer duration,
and spend more than store-focused customers.
Multiple touchpoint shoppers are more
involved, younger, and from a larger
household, have a longer journey duration
and more online experience, and spend more
than store-focused customers.
Online-to-offline shoppers are more involved
and more often male, have a longer journey
duration and more online experience, and
spend more than store-focused customers.
New segment
Multichannel enthusiasts
(Konus et al. 2008)
Research shoppers
(De Keyseret al. 2015;
Verhoef et al. 2007)
Note: Details on the segmentation results are provided in Web Appendix 5. We used the “Store-Focused Segment” as the reference category for covariates because it is the most traditional segment in
terms of touchpoint usage (e.g., Konus et al. 2008).
45
Table 5: Typical Journey Patterns in the Segments
Percentage of Customers with the Journey Pattern
Journey Pattern n
Store-
Focused
Segment
Pragmatic
Online
Segment
Extensive
Online
Segment
Multiple
Touchpoint
Segment
Online-to-
Offline
Segment
Physical Store→Physical Store Online Store→Online Store 283 95% – – – 5%
202 – 94% 1% 4% –
Additional Touchpoint→Online Store 65 – 83% 15% – –
Additional Touchpoint→Competitor Touchpoint→Physical Store 51 27% – – – 73%
Competitor Touchpoint→Physical Store 46 76% – – – 24%
Additional Touchpoint→Competitor Touchpoint→Online Store 42 – 10% 86% 5% –
Additional Touchpoint→Physical Store 41 39% – – – 61%
Online Store→Competitor Touchpoint→Online Store 40 – 43% 58% – –
Online Store→Physical Store 38 26% – – 3% 71%
Physical Store→Competitor Touchpoint→Physical Store 33 97% – – – 3%
Additional Touchpoint→Online Store→Competitor Touchpoint→Online Store 25 – 4% 88% 8% –
Physical Store→Competitor Touchpoint→Additional Touchpoint→Physical Store 25 64% – – – 36%
Additional Touchpoint→Competitor Touchpoint→Online Store→Physical Store 22 5% – 5% – 91%
Catalog→Online Store 21 – 95% – 5% –
Physical Store→Online Store Catalog→Physical Store 21 38% 57% – 5% –
20 100% – – – –
Complex journeys with more than six touchpoints 363 1% 1% 6% 57% 35%
Note: Journey patterns from the 2016 data. Only similar journey patterns from at least 20 participants are displayed. The dominant segments are in bold and italics.
46
Table 6: Predicted Importance of Product Satisfaction, Journey Satisfaction, and Customer Inspiration
Loyalty Effect of…
Product Satisfaction Journey Satisfaction Customer Inspiration
Segments
Store-Focused Segment stronger effect weaker effect positive effect
Pragmatic Online Segment stronger effect weaker effect no effect
Extensive Online Segment similar effect no effect
Multiple Touchpoint Segment weaker effect stronger effect positive effect
Online-to-Offline Segment similar effect positive effect
Journey Characteristics
Higher Number of Touchpoints weaker effect stronger effect stronger effect
47
Table 7: Segment-Specific Predictors of Customer Loyalty
Customer Loyalty
Full
Sample
Store-
Focused
Segment
Pragmatic
Online
Segment
Extensive
Online
Segment
Multiple
Touchpoint
Segment
Online-to-
Offline
Segment
2013 Data
Product Satisfaction (β12013) .28** .43** .48** .26* .08 .39**
Journey Satisfaction (β22013) .21** .14** .15** .30** .58** .17**
Wald Test: β12013 = β22013 3.04 6.67** 7.90** 0.02 8.55** 2.78
R2 .27 .34 .27 .33 .47 .27
N 2,443 546 568 524 308 497
2016 Data
Step 1
Product Satisfaction (β12016) .32** .40** .52** .33** .08 .37**
Journey Satisfaction (β22016) .24** .17** .20** .02 .81** .21**
Wald Test: β12016 = β22016 4.86* 4.11* 9.35** 4.87* 37.42** 3.27
R2 .31 .44 .40 .29 .60 .34
Step 1
Product Satisfaction (β12016) .31** .38** .52** .39** -.02 .37**
Journey Satisfaction (β22016) .22** .15** .18** .05 .61** .20**
Customer Inspiration (β3) .07** .07* .04 .01 .22** .08*
Wald Test: β12016 = β22016 5.91* 4.94* 10.59** 4.97* 14.21** 3.70
R2 .31 .45 .40 .30 .61 .35
N 2,649 645 573 352 381 698
Note: **p < .01, *p < .05, two-tailed tests. We used the Three-Step Approach to model the distant outcome of the latent classes (Asparouhov and Muthén 2014; Nylund-Gibson et al. 2014). We include
all controls in the analyses; full results are available in Web Appendix 6.
48
Table 8: Managerial Implications to Serve Customer Journey Segments
Segment Size Moments of Truth Loyalty Antecedents Strategic Recommendations
Store-
Focused
Segment
2013: 22%
2016: 24%
1. Physical store (4.07)
2. Competitor physical
store (1.81)
3. Word of mouth (1.72)
Pragmatic
Online
Segment
2013: 23%
2016: 22%
1. Online store (5.46)
2. Other touchpoints (2.35)
3. Catalog (1.77)
Extensive
Online
Segment
2013: 21%
2016: 13%
1. Online store (5.82)
2. Competitor online store
(4.32)
3. Search Engine (3.94)
Multiple
Touchpoint
Segment
2013: 13%
2016: 14%
1. Online store (5.71)
2. Physical store (4.07)
3. Search engine (3.85)
Online-to-
Offline
Segment
2013: 20%
2016: 26%
1. Physical store (5.66)
2. Search engine (3.29)
3. Competitor online store
(3.25)
Product Satisfaction (++)
Journey Satisfaction (+)
Customer Inspiration (+)
Still large segment but less valuable due to lower spending that can only be
served with the physical store.
Aim to keep these customers within own physical store.
Provide an attractive assortment with the right mix of products and prices.
Only the within-store experience is important, and providing some form of
inspiration can provide more value for the retailer.
Product Satisfaction (++)
Journey Satisfaction (+)
Segment that can only be served online.
Provide an attractive online assortment with the right mix of products and
prices.
Provide an efficient journey that enables these customers to buy their required
products quickly.
Product Satisfaction (++) Decreasing but valuable segment that can only be served online (incl. mobile).
Provide extensive online search opportunities and information about products.
Aim to keep this customer within own online store.
Invest in search engine advertising
Provide an attractive online assortment with the right mix of products and
prices.
Include mobile as an important device.
Journey Satisfaction (++)
Customer Inspiration (+)
Valuable segment that should be served through multiple touchpoints in the
search phase, and purchasing opportunities should be provided offline as well
as online and mobile.
Invest in search engine advertising.
Provide a seamless journey and inspiration during the journey.
Include mobile as a dominant device.
Product Satisfaction (++)
Journey Satisfaction (+)
Customer Inspiration (+)
Growing segment that should be served online in the search phase and offline
in the purchase stage.
Provide an attractive online assortment with the right mix of products and
prices across channels.
Provide a seamless journey within your own touchpoints and provide
inspiration.
Note: Details on the Moments of Truth and Loyalty Antecedents are provided in Web Appendix 6 and Web Appendix 7. Moments of Truth refer to the most important touchpoints for the purchase
decision in 2016 (1 = not used / not important at all to 7 = very important).
49
Table 9: Similarities between Clickstream Studies and our Findings
Study
Online
Touchpoints
Offline
Touchpoints
Mobile
Device Segmentation Category Related Findings
Montgomery
et al. (2004)
Li and Kannan
(2014)
Anderl et al.
(2016a)
Yes — — — Multiple Similar to our results, competitor-owned and additional touchpoints
are crucial elements of the customer journey.
Yes — — — Hospitality The “moment of truth” (i.e., highest conversion probability) is at a
firm-owned touchpoint (i.e., paid search) and not at organic search.
Yes — — — Fashion Average journey duration is 2.7 days. Pragmatic online shoppers and
store-focused shoppers have a duration below average and multiple
touchpoint shoppers above average.
Anderl et al.
(2016b)
Yes — — — Multiple The number of touchpoints a customer uses within the journey is
negatively associated with conversion probability, underscoring the
importance of journey satisfaction for the “multiple touchpoint
shoppers”.
In line with our results for multiple touchpoint shoppers, extensive
online shoppers, and online-to-offline shoppers, a typical start
touchpoint for journeys is the search engine.
The average journey length ranges from 1.3 touchpoints to 2.5
touchpoints. Similar to our results, the segment of customers using
more than five touchpoints along their journey (i.e., multiple
touchpoint shoppers) is the smallest.
Mallapragada
et al. (2016)
Yes — — — Multiple In line with the “multiple touchpoint shoppers”, there is a positive
relationship between the amount of touchpoints used and the
spending level.
Xu et al.
(2016)
Yes — Yes — Multiple Instead of replacing other touchpoints, mobile devices are mainly
used as an additional search channel (no “mobile shopper segment”).
Park (2017) Yes — — Yes Air Travel Similar to our results, competitor-owned and additional touchpoints
are crucial elements of the customer journey.
Existence of two different groups of digital shoppers – those who
visit only one or two touchpoints (i.e., “pragmatic online shopping”)
and those who use multiple touchpoints within a shopping episode
(i.e., “extensive online shoppers”).
de Haan et al.
(2018)
Yes — Yes — Multiple Instead of replacing other touchpoints, mobile devices are mainly
used as an additional search channel (no “mobile shopper segment”).
Note: We only report selected studies. Please consult Kannan, Reinartz, and Verhoef (2016) for an in-depth discussion of clickstream studies.
50
Figure 1: Overview of the Research
Note: We include age, gender, income, education, household size, and urbanization as sociodemographic covariates; involvement, time pressure, and price consciousness as
psychographic covariates; and duration of journey, online experience, offline experience, customer duration, buying frequency, and spending as other covariates. We further
control for category (apparel, cosmetics, electronics, entertainment, and other category). We use the customer journey segments identified in Part I to develop the hypotheses in
Part II.
51