A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION,
AND COOPERATION*
ERNST FEHR AND KLAUS M. SCHMIDT
There is strong evidence that people exploit their bargaining power in
competitive markets but not in bilateral bargaining situations. There is also strong
evidence that people exploit free-riding opportunities in voluntary cooperation
games. Y et, when they are given the opportunity to punish free riders, stable
cooperation is maintained, although punishment is costly for those who punish.
This paper asks whether there is a simple common principle that can explain this
puzzling evidence. We show that if some people care about equity the puzzles can
be resolved. It turns out that the economic environment determines whether the
fair types or the selsh types dominate equilibrium behavior.
I. INTRODUCTION
Almost all economic models assume that all people are
exclusively pursuing their material self-interest and do not care
about ‘‘social’’ goals per se. This may be true for some (maybe
many) people, but it is certainly not true for everybody . By now we
have substantial evidence suggesting that fairness motives affect
the behavior of many people. The empirical results of Kahneman,
Knetsch, and Thaler [1986], for example, indicate that customers
have strong feelings about the fairness of rms’ short-run pricing
decisions which may explain why some rms do not fully exploit
their monopoly power. There is also a lot of evidence suggesting
that rms’ wage setting is constrained by workers’ views about
what constitutes a fair wage [Blinder and Choi 1990; Agell and
Lundborg 1995; Bewley 1995; Campbell and Kamlani 1997].
According to these studies, a major reason for rms’ refusal to cut
wages in a recession is the fear that workers will perceive pay cuts
as unfair which in turn is expected to affect work morale ad-
versely . There are also many well-controlled bilateral bargaining
experiments which indicate that a nonnegligible fraction of the
* We would like to thank seminar participants at the Universities of Bonn
and Berlin, Harvard, Princeton, and Oxford Universities, the European Summer
Symposium on Economic Theory 1997 at Gerzense ´
e (Switzerland), and the ESA
conference in Mannheim for helpful comments and suggestions. We are particu-
larly grateful to three excellent referees and to Drew Fudenberg and John Kagel
for their insightful comments. The rst author also gratefully acknowledges
support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (project number 1214-
05100.97) and the Network on the Evolution of Preferences and Social Norms of
the MacArthur Foundation. The second author acknowledges nancial support by
the German Science Foundation through grant SCHM 119614-1.
r 1999 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology .
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1999
817
818
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
subjects do not care solely about material payoffs [Gu ¨ th and Tietz,
1990; Roth 1995; Camerer and Thaler 1995]. However, there is
also evidence that seems to suggest that fairness considerations
are rather unimportant. For example, in competitive experimen-
tal markets with complete contracts, in which a well-dened
homogeneous good is traded, almost all subjects behave as if they
are only interested in their material payoff. Even if the competi-
tive equilibrium implies an extremely uneven distribution of the
gains from trade, equilibrium is reached within a few periods
[Smith and Williams 1990; Roth, Prasnikar, Okuno-Fujiwara, and
Zamir 1991; Kachelmeier and Shehata 1992; Gu ¨ th, Marchand,
and Rulliere 1997].
There is similarly conicting evidence with regard to coopera-
tion. Reality provides many examples indicating that people are
more cooperative than is assumed in the standard self-interest
model. Well-known examples are that many people vote, pay their
taxes honestly , participate in unions and protest movements, or
work hard in teams even when the pecuniary incentives go in the
opposite direction.1 This is also shown in laboratory experiments
[Dawes and Thaler 1988; Ledyard 1995]. Under some conditions it
has even been shown that subjects achieve nearly full cooperation,
although the self-interest model predicts complete defection [Isaac
and Walker 1988, 1991; Ostrom and Walker 1991; Fehr and
Ga ¨ chter 1996].2 However , as we will see in more detail in Section
IV , there are also those conditions under which a vast majority of
subjects completely defect as predicted by the self-interest model.
There is thus a bewildering variety of evidence. Some pieces
of evidence suggest that many people are driven by fairness
considerations, other pieces indicate that virtually all people
behave as if completely selsh, and still other types of evidence
suggest that cooperation motives are crucial. In this paper we ask
whether this conicting evidence can be explained by a single
simple model. Our answer to this question is affirmative if one is
willing to assume that, in addition to purely self-interested
people, there are a fraction of people who are also motivated by
fairness considerations. No other deviations from the standard
1. On voting see Mueller [1989]. Skinner and Slemroad [1985] argue that the
standard self-interest model substantially underpredicts the number of honest
taxpayers. Successful team production in, e.g., Japanese-managed auto factories
in North America is described in Rehder [1990]. Whyte [1955] discusses how
workers establish ‘‘production norms’’ under piece-rate systems.
2. Isaac and Walker and Ostrom and Walker allow for cheap talk, while in
Fehr and Ga ¨ chter subjects could punish each other at some cost.
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 819
economic approach are necessary to account for the evidence. In
particular, we do not relax the rationality assumption.3
We model fairness as self-centered inequity aversion. Ineq-
uity aversion means that people resist inequitable outcomes; i.e.,
they are willing to give up some material payoff to move in the
direction of more equitable outcomes. Inequity aversion is self-
centered if people do not care per se about inequity that exists
among other people but are only interested in the fairness of their
own material payoff relative to the payoff of others. We show that
in the presence of some inequity-averse people ‘‘fair’’ and ‘‘coopera-
tive’’ as well as ‘‘competitive’’ and ‘‘noncooperative’’ behavioral
patterns can be explained in a coherent framework. A main
insight of our examination is that the heterogeneity of preferences
interacts in important ways with the economic environment. We
show , in particular, that the economic environment determines
the preference type that is decisive for the prevailing behavior in
equilibrium. This means, for example, that under certain competi-
tive conditions a single purely selsh player can induce a large
number of extremely inequity-averse players to behave in a
completely selsh manner , too. Likewise, under certain conditions
for the provision of a public good, a single selsh player is capable
of inducing all other players to contribute nothing to the public
good, although the others may care a lot about equity . We also
show , however , that there are circumstances in which the exis-
tence of a few inequity-averse players creates incentives for a
majority of purely selsh types to contribute to the public good.
Moreover , the existence of inequity-averse types may also induce
selsh types to pay wages above the competitive level. This
reveals that, in the presence of heterogeneous preferences, the
economic environment has a whole new dimension of effects.4
There are a few other papers that formalize the notion of
fairness.5 In particular, Rabin [1993] argues that people want to
be nice to those who treat them fairly and want to punish those
who hurt them. According to Rabin, an action is perceived as fair if
3. This differentiates our model from learning models (e.g., Roth and Erev
[1995]) that relax the rationality assumption but maintain the assumption that all
players are only interested in their own material payoff. The issue of learning is
further discussed in Section VII below .
4. Our paper is, therefore, motivated by a concern similar to the papers by
Haltiwanger and Waldman [1985] and Russell and Thaler [1985]. While these
authors examine the conditions under which nonrational or quasi-rational types
affect equilibrium outcomes, we analyze the conditions under which fair types
affect the equilibrium.
5. Section VIII deals with them in more detail.
820
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
the intention that is behind the action is kind, and as unfair if the
intention is hostile. The kindness or the hostility of the intention,
in turn, depends on the equitability of the payoff distribution
induced by the action. Thus, Rabin’s model, as our model, is based
on the notion of an equitable outcome. In contrast to our model,
however , Rabin models the role of intentions explicitly . We
acknowledge that intentions do play an important role and that it
is desirable to model them explicitly. However, the explicit model-
ing of intentions comes at a cost because it requires the adoption of
psychological game theory that is much more difficult to apply
than standard game theory . In fact, Rabin’s model is restricted to
two-person normal form games, which means that very important
classes of games, like, e.g., market games and n-person public
good games cannot be analyzed. Since a major focus of this paper
is the role of fairness in competitive environments and the
analysis of n-person cooperation games, we chose not to model
intentions explicitly. This has the advantage of keeping the model
simple and tractable. We would like to stress, however, that—
although we do not model intentions explicitly—it is possible to
capture intentions implicitly by our formulation of fairness prefer-
ences. We deal with this issue in Section VIII.
The rest of the paper is organized as followed. In Section II we
present our model of inequity aversion. Section III applies this
model to bilateral bargaining and market games. In Section IV
cooperation games with and without punishments are considered.
In Section V we show that, on the basis of plausible assumptions
about preference parameters, the majority of individual choices in
ultimatum and market and cooperation games considered in the
previous sections are consistent with the predictions of our model.
Section VI deals with the dictator game and with gift exchange
games. In Section VII we discuss potential extensions and objec-
tions to our model. Section VIII compares our model with alterna-
tive approaches in the literature. Section IX concludes.
II. A SIMPLE MODEL OF INEQUITY AVERSION
An individual is inequity averse if he dislikes outcomes that
are perceived as inequitable. This denition raises, of course, the
difficult question of how individuals measure or perceive the
fairness of outcomes. Fairness judgments are inevitably based on
a kind of neutral reference outcome. The reference outcome that is
used to evaluate a given situation is itself the product of compli-
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 821
cated social comparison processes. In social psychology [Festinger
1954; Stouffer 1949; Homans 1961; Adams 1963] and sociology
[Davis 1959; Pollis 1968; Runciman 1966] the relevance of social
comparison processes has been emphasized for a long time. One
key insight of this literature is that relative material payoffs affect
people’s well-being and behavior. As we will see below , without the
assumption that at least for some people relative payoffs matter, it
is difficult, if not impossible, to make sense of the empirical
regularities observed in many experiments. There is, moreover ,
direct empirical evidence for the importance of relative payoffs.
Agell and Lundborg [1995] and Bewley [1998], for example, show
that relative payoff considerations constitute an important con-
straint for the internal wage structure of rms. In addition, Clark
and Oswald [1996] show that comparison incomes have a signi-
cant impact on overall job satisfaction. They construct a compari-
son income level for a random sample of roughly 10,000 British
individuals by computing a standard earnings equation. This
earnings equation determines the predicted or expected wage of
an individual with given socioeconomic characteristics. Then they
examine the impact of this comparison wage on overall job
satisfaction. Their main result is that—holding other things
constant—the comparison income has a large and signicantly
negative impact on overall job satisfaction.
Strong evidence for the importance of relative payoffs is also
provided by Loewenstein, Thompson, and Bazerman [1989]. These
authors asked subjects to ordinally rank outcomes that differ in
the distribution of payoffs between the subject and a comparison
person. On the basis of these ordinal rankings, the authors
estimate how relative material payoffs enter the person’s utility
function. The results show that subjects exhibit a strong and
robust aversion against disadvantageous inequality: for a given
own income xi, subjects rank outcomes in which a comparison
person earns more than xi substantially lower than an outcome
with equal material payoffs. Many subjects also exhibit an
aversion to advantageous inequality although this effect seems to
be signicantly weaker than the aversion to disadvantageous
inequality .
The determination of the relevant reference group and the
relevant reference outcome for a given class of individuals is
ultimately an empirical question. The social context, the saliency
of particular agents, and the social proximity among individuals
are all likely to inuence reference groups and outcomes. Because
822
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
in the following we restrict attention to individual behavior in
economic experiments, we have to make assumptions about
reference groups and outcomes that are likely to prevail in this
context. In the laboratory it is usually much simpler to dene
what is perceived as an equitable allocation by the subjects. The
subjects enter the laboratory as equals, they do not know any-
thing about each other , and they are allocated to different roles in
the experiment at random. Thus, it is natural to assume that the
reference group is simply the set of subjects playing against each
other and that the reference point, i.e., the equitable outcome, is
given by the egalitarian outcome.
More precisely , we assume the following. First, in addition to
purely selsh subjects, there are subjects who dislike inequitable
outcomes. They experience inequity if they are worse off in
material terms than the other players in the experiment, and they
also feel inequity if they are better off. Second, however , we
assume that, in general, subjects suffer more from inequity that is
to their material disadvantage than from inequity that is to their
material advantage. Formally , consider a set of n players indexed
by i [ 1, . . . , n , and let x 5 x1, . . . , xn denote the vector of mone-
tary payoffs. The utility function of player i [ 1, . . . , n is given by
1
(1) Ui(x)5 xi2 a i
n2 1 ojÞ i
max xj2 xi,0
2 b i
1
n2 1 ojÞ i
max xi2 xj,0 ,
where we assume that b i # a i and 0 # b i , 1. In the two-player
case (1) simplies to
(2) Ui(x)5 xi2 a i max xj2 xi,02 b i max xi2 xj,0 , i Þ j.
The second term in (1) or (2) measures the utility loss from
disadvantageous inequality , while the third term measures the
loss from advantageous inequality . Figure I illustrates the utility
of player i as a function of xj for a given income xi. Given his own
monetary payoff xi, player i’s utility function obtains a maximum
at xj 5 xi. The utility loss from disadvantageous inequality (xj . xi)
is larger than the utility loss if player i is better off than player
j(xj , x i).6
6. In all experiments considered in this paper , the monetary payoff functions
of all subjects were common knowledge. Note that for inequity aversion to be
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 823
FIGURE I
Preferences with Inequity Aversion
To evaluate the implications of this utility function, let us
start with the two-player case. For simplicity , we assume that the
utility function is linear in inequality aversion as well as in xi.
This implies that the marginal rate of substitution between
monetary income and inequality is constant. This may not be fully
realistic, but we will show that surprisingly many experimental
observations that seem to contradict each other can be explained
on the basis of this very simple utility function already . However ,
we will also see that some observations in dictator experiments
suggest that there are a nonnegligible fraction of people who
exhibit nonlinear inequality aversion in the domain of advanta-
geous inequality (see Section VI below).
Furthermore, the assumption a i $ b i captures the idea that a
player suffers more from inequality that is to his disadvantage.
The above-mentioned paper by Loewenstein, Thompson, and
behaviorally important it is not necessary for subjects to be informed about the
nal monetary payoffs of the other subjects. As long as subjects’ material payoff
functions are common knowledge, they can compute the distributional implica-
tions of any (expected) strategy prole; i.e., inequity aversion can affect their
decisions.
824
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Bazerman [1989] provides strong evidence that this assumption
is, in general, valid. Note that a i $ b i essentially means that a
subject is loss averse in social comparisons: negative deviations
from the reference outcome count more than positive deviations.
There is a large literature indicating the relevance of loss aversion
in other domains (e.g., Tversky and Kahneman [1991]). Hence, it
seems natural that loss aversion also affects social comparisons.
We also assume that 0 # b i , 1. b i $ 0 means that we rule out
the existence of subjects who like to be better off than others. We
impose this assumption here, although we believe that there are
subjects with b i , 0.7 The reason is that in the context of the
experiments we consider individuals with b i , 0 have virtually no
impact on equilibrium behavior. This is in itself an interesting
insight that will be discussed extensively in Section VII. To
interpret the restriction b i , 1, suppose that player i has a higher
monetary payoff than player j. In this case b i 5 0.5 implies that
player i is just indifferent between keeping one dollar to himself
and giving this dollar to player j. If b i 5 1, then player i is
prepared to throw away one dollar in order to reduce his advan-
tage relative to player j which seems very implausible. This is why
we do not consider the case b i $ 1. On the other hand, there is no
justication to put an upper bound on a i. To see this, suppose that
player i has a lower monetary payoff than player j. In this case
player i is prepared to give up one dollar of his own monetary
payoff if this reduces the payoff of his opponent by (1 1 a i)/a i
dollars. For example, if a i 5 4, then player i is willing to give up
one dollar if this reduces the payoff of his opponent by 1.25 dollars.
We will see that observable behavior in bargaining and public
good games suggests that there are at least some individuals with
such high a ’s.
If there are n . 2 players, player i compares his income with
all other n2 1 players. In this case the disutility from inequality
has been normalized by dividing the second and third term by n2 1. This normalization is necessary to make sure that the relative
impact of inequality aversion on player i’s total payoff is indepen-
dent of the number of players. Furthermore, we assume for
simplicity that the disutility from inequality is self-centered in the
sense that player i compares himself with each of the other
7. For the role of status seeking and envy , see Frank [1985] and Banerjee
[1990].
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 825
players, but he does not care per se about inequalities within the
group of his opponents.
III. FAIRNESS, RETALIATION, AND COMPETITION: ULTIMATUM
AND MARKET GAMES
In this section we apply our model to a well-known simple
bargaining game—the ultimatum game—and to simple market
games in which one side of the market competes for an indivisible
good. As we will see below, a considerable body of experimental
evidence indicates that in the ultimatum game the gains from
trade are shared relatively equally while in market games very
unequal distributions are frequently observed. Hence, any alterna-
tive to the standard self-interest model faces the challenge to
explain both ‘‘fair’’ outcomes in the ultimatum game and ‘‘competi-
tive’’ and rather ‘‘unfair’’ outcomes in market games.
A. The Ultimatum Game
In an ultimatum game a proposer and a responder bargain
about the distribution of a surplus of xed size. Without loss of
generality we normalize the bargaining surplus to one. The
responder’s share is denoted by s and the proposer’s share by 12 s. The bargaining rules stipulate that the proposer offers a share s [ [0,1] to the responder . The responder can accept or reject s. In
case of acceptance the proposer receives a (normalized) monetary
payoff x1 5 12 s, while the responder receives x2 5 s. In case of a
rejection both players receive a monetary return of zero. The
self-interest model predicts that the responder accepts any s [
(0,1] and is indifferent between accepting and rejecting s 5 0.
Therefore, there is a unique subgame perfect equilibrium in which
the proposer offers s 5 0, which is accepted by the responder.8
By now there are numerous experimental studies from differ-
ent countries, with different stake sizes and different experimen-
tal procedures, that clearly refute this prediction (for overviews
8. Given that the proposer can choose s continuously , any offer s . 0 cannot be
an equilibrium offer since there always exists an s8 with 0 , s8 , s which is also
accepted by the responder and yields a strictly higher payoff to the proposer .
Furthermore, it cannot be an equilibrium that the proposer offers s 5 0 which is
rejected by the responder with positive probability . In this case the proposer would
do better by slightly raising his price—in which case the responder would accept
with probability 1. Hence, the only subgame perfect equilibrium is that the
proposer offers s 5 0 which is accepted by the responder. If there is a smallest
money unit e , then there exists a second subgame perfect equilibrium in which the
responder accepts any s [ [e ,1] and rejects, s 5 0 while the proposer offers e .
826
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
see Thaler [1988], Gu ¨ th and Tietz [1990], Camerer and Thaler
[1995], and Roth [1995]). The following regularities can be consid-
ered as robust facts (see Table I). (i) There are virtually no offers
above 0.5. (ii) The vast majority of offers in almost any study is in
the interval [0.4, 0.5]. (iii) There are almost no offers below 0.2. (iv)
Low offers are frequently rejected, and the probability of rejection
tends to decrease with s. Regularities (i) to (iv) continue to hold for
rather high stake sizes, as indicated by the results of Cameron
[1995], Hoffman, McCabe, and Smith [1996], and Slonim and Roth
[1997]. The 200,000 rupiahs in the second experiment of Cameron
(see Table I) are, e.g., equivalent to three months’ income for the
Indonesian subjects. Overall, roughly 60–80 percent of the offers
in Table I fall in the interval [0.4, 0.5], while only 3 percent are
below a share of 0.2.
T o what extent is our model capable of accounting for the
stylized facts of the ultimatum game? T o answer this question,
suppose that the proposer’s preferences are represented by (a 1,b 1),
while the responder’s preferences are characterized by (a 2,b 2).
The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium outcome
as a function of these parameters.
PROPOSITION 1. It is a dominant strategy for the responder to
accept any offer s $ 0.5, to reject s if
s , s8(a 2 ) ; a 2 /(1 1 2a 2 ) , 0.5,
and to accept s . s8(a of the responder, he will offer
2). If the proposer knows the preferences
5 0.5 if b 1 . 0.5
[ [s8(a 2),0.5] if b 1 5 0.5
5 s8(a 2) if b 1 , 0.5
in equilibrium. If the proposer does not know the preferences
of the responder but believes that a 2 is distributed according
to the cumulative distribution function F(a 2), where F(a 2)
has support [a , a ] with 0 # a , a , ` , then the probability
(from the perspective of the proposer) that an offer s , 0.5 is
going to be accepted is given by
(4) p5
1 if s $ s8(a )
F(s/(12 2s)) [ (0,1) if s8(a ) , s , s8(a ))
0 if s # s8(a ).
(3) s*
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 827
TABLE I
PERCENTAGE OF OFFERS BELOW 0.2 AND BETWEEN 0.4 AND 0.5
IN THE ULTIMATUM GAME
Study
(Payment method)
Number of
observations
Stake size
(country)
Cameron [1995]
(All Ss Paid)
Cameron [1995]
(all Ss paid)
FHSS [1994]
(all Ss paid)
Gu ¨ th et al. [1982]
(all Ss paid)
Hoffman, McCabe,
and Smith [1996]
(All Ss paid)
Hoffman, McCabe,
and Smith [1996]
(all Ss paid)
Kahneman,
Knetsch, and
Thaler [1986]
(20% of Ss paid)
Roth et al. [1991]
(random pay-
ment method)
Slonim and Roth
[1997]
(random pay-
ment method)
Slonim and Roth
[1997]
(random pay-
ment method)
Aggregate result of
all studiese
Percentage of
offers with
s , 0.2
35 Rp 40.000
(Indonesia)
37 Rp 200.000
(Indonesia)
67 $5 and $10
(USA)
79 DM 4–10
(Germany)
24 $10
(USA)
27 $100
(USA)
115 $10
(USA)
116b approx. $10
(USA, Slovenia,
Israel, Japan)
240c SK 60
(Slovakia)
250c SK 1500
(Slovakia)
Percentage of
offers with
0.4 # s # 0.5
0 66
5 57
0 82
8 61
0 83
4 74
? 75a
3 70
0.4d 75
8d 69
875 3.8 71
a. percentage of equal splits, b. only observations of the nal period, c. observations of all ten periods,
d. percentage of offers below 0.25, e. without Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler [1986].
Hence, the optimal offer of the proposer is given by
5 0.5 if b 1 . 0.5
(5) s*
[ [s8(a ), 0.5] if b 1 5 0.5
[ (s8(a ), s8(a )] if b 1 , 0.5.
828
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Proof. If s $ 0.5, the utility of a responder from accepting s is
U2 (s)5 s2 b 2(2s2 1), which is always positive for b 2 , 1 and thus
better than a rejection that yields a payoff of 0. The point is that
the responder can achieve equality only by destroying the entire
surplus which is very costly to him if s $ 0.5; i.e., if the inequality
is to his advantage. For s , 0.5, a responder accepts the offer only
if the utility from acceptance, U2(s)5 s2 a 2(12 2s), is nonnega-
tive which is the case only if s exceeds the acceptance threshold
s8(a 2) ; a 2 /(1 1 2a 2) , 0.5.
At stage 1 a proposer never offers s . 0.5. This would reduce his
monetary payoff as compared with an offer of s 5 0.5, which would
also be accepted with certainty and which would yield perfect
equality . If b 1 . 0.5, his utility is strictly increasing in s for all s # 0.5. This is the case where the proposer prefers to share his
resources rather than to maximize his own monetary payoff, so he
will offer s 5 0.5. If b 1 5 0.5, he is just indifferent between giving
one dollar to the responder and keeping it to himself; i.e., he is
indifferent between all offers s [ [s’(a 2), 0.5]. If b 1 , 0.5, the
proposer would like to increase his monetary payoff at the expense
of the responder . However , he is constrained by the responder’s
acceptance threshold. If the proposer is perfectly informed about
the responder’s preferences, he will simply offer s8(a 2 ). If the
proposer is imperfectly informed about the responder’s type, then
the probability of acceptance is F(s/(12 2s)) which is equal to one
if s $ a (1 1 2a ) and equal to zero if s # a /(1 1 a ). Hence, in this
case there exists an optimal offer s [ (s8(a ), s8(a )].
QED
Proposition 1 accounts for many of the above-mentioned facts.
It shows that there are no offers above 0.5, that offers of 0.5 are
always accepted, and that very low offers are very likely to be
rejected. Furthermore, the probability of acceptance, F(s/(12 2s)),
is increasing in s for s , s8(a ) , 0.5. Note also that the acceptance
threshold s8(a 2 )5 a 2 /(1 1 2a 2) is nonlinear and has some intui-
tively appealing properties. It is increasing and strictly concave in
a 2, and it converges to 0.5 if a 2 ` . Furthermore, relatively small
values of a 2 already yield relatively large thresholds. For example,
a 2 5 1 3 implies that s8(a 2)5 0.2 and a 2 5 0.75 implies that s8(a 2)5 0.3.
In Section V we go beyond the predictions implied by Proposi-
tion 1. There we ask whether there is a distribution of preferences
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 829
that can explain not just the major facts of the ultimatum game
but also the facts in market and cooperation games that will be
discussed in the next sections.
B. Market Game with Proposer Competition
It is a well-established experimental fact that in a broad class
of market games prices converge to the competitive equilibrium.
[Smith 1982; Davis and Holt 1993]. For our purposes, the interest-
ing fact is that convergence to the competitive equilibrium can be
observed even if that equilibrium is very ‘‘unfair’’ by virtually any
conceivable denition of fairness; i.e., if all of the gains from trade
are reaped by one side of the market. This empirical feature of
competition can be demonstrated in a simple market game in
which many price-setting sellers (proposers) want to sell one unit
of a good to a single buyer (responder) who demands only one unit
of the good.9
Such a game has been implemented in four different coun-
tries by Roth, Prasnikar, Okuno-Fujiwara, and Zamir [1991]:
suppose that there are n2 1 proposers who simultaneously
propose a share si [ [0,1], i [ 1, . . . , n2 1 , to the responder. The
responder has the opportunity to accept or reject the highest offer
s 5 maxi si. If there are several proposers who offered s, one of
them is randomly selected with equal probability . If the responder
rejects s, no trade takes place, and all players receive a monetary
payoff of zero. If the responder accepts s, her monetary payoff is s,
and the successful proposer earns 12 s while unsuccessful
proposers earn zero. If players are only concerned about their
monetary payoffs, this market game has a straightforward solu-
tion: the responder accepts any s . 0. Hence, for any si # s , 1,
there exists an e . 0 such that proposer i can strictly increase this
monetary payoff by offering s 1 e , 1. Therefore, any equilibrium
candidate must have s 5 1. Furthermore, in equilibrium a
proposer i who offered si 5 1 must not have an incentive to lower
his offer. Thus, there must be at least one other player j who
proposed sj 5 1, too. Hence, there is a unique subgame perfect
9. We deliberately restrict our attention to simple market games for two
reasons: (i) the potential impact of inequity aversion can be seen most clearly in
such simple games; (ii) they allow for an explicit game-theoretic analysis. In
particular , it is easy to establish the identity between the competitive equilibrium
and the subgame perfect equilibrium outcome in these games. Notice that some
experimental market games, like, e.g., the continuous double auction as developed
by Smith [1962], have such complicated strategy spaces that no complete
game-theoretic analysis is yet available. For attempts in this direction see
Friedman and Rust [1993] and Sadrieh [1998].
830
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
equilibrium outcome in which at least two proposers make an offer
of one, and the responder reaps all gains from trade.10
Roth et al. [1991] have implemented a market game in which
nine players simultaneously proposed si while one player accepted
or rejected s. Experimental sessions in four different countries
have been conducted. The empirical results provide ample evi-
dence in favor of the above prediction. After approximately ve to
six periods the subgame perfect equilibrium outcome was reached
in each experiment in each of the four countries. T o what extent
can our model explain this observation?
PROPOSITION 2. Suppose that the utility functions of the players
are given by (1). For any parameters (a i, b i), i [ 1, . . . , n ,
there is a unique subgame perfect equilibrium outcome in
which at least two proposers offer s 5 1 which is accepted by
the responder .
The formal proof of the proposition is relegated to the
Appendix, but the intuition is quite straightforward. Note rst
that, for similar reasons as in the ultimatum game, the responder
must accept any s $ 0.5. Suppose that he rejects a ‘‘low’’ offer s , 0.5. This cannot happen on the equilibrium path either since in
this case proposer i can improve his payoff by offering si 5 0.5
which is accepted with probability 1 and gives him a strictly
higher payoff. Hence, on the equilibrium path s must be accepted.
Consider now any equilibrium candidate with s , 1. If there is one
player i offering si , s, then this player should have offered
slightly more than s. There will be inequality anyway, but by
winning the competition, player i can increase his own monetary
payoff, and he can turn the inequality to his advantage. A similar
argument applies if all players offer si 5 s , 1. By slightly
increasing his offer, player i can increase the probability of
winning the competition from 1/(n2 1) to 1. Again, this increases
his expected monetary payoff, and it turns the inequality toward
the other proposers to his advantage. Therefore, s , 1 cannot be
part of a subgame perfect equilibrium. Hence, the only equilib-
rium candidate is that at least two sellers offer s 5 1. This is a
subgame perfect equilibrium since all sellers receive a payoff of 0,
and no player can change this outcome by changing his action.
The formal proof in the Appendix extends this argument to the
10. Note that there are many subgame perfect equilibria in this game. As long
as two sellers propose s 5 1, any offer distribution of the remaining sellers is
compatible with equilibrium.
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 831
possibility of mixed strategies. This extension also shows that the
competitive outcome must be the unique equilibrium outcome in
the game with incomplete information where proposers do not
know each others’ utility functions.
Proposition 2 provides an explanation for why markets in all
four countries in which Roth et al. [1991] conducted this experi-
ment quickly converged to the competitive outcome even though
the results of the ultimatum game, that have also been done in
these countries, are consistent with the view that the distribution
of preferences differs across countries.11
C. Market Game with Responder Competition
In this section we apply our model of inequity aversion to a
market game for which it is probably too early to speak of
well-established stylized facts since only one study with a rela-
tively small number of independent observations [Gu ¨ th, March-
and, and Rulliere 1997] has been conducted so far. The game
concerns a situation in which there is one proposer but many
responders competing against each other . The rules of the game
are as follows. The proposer , who is denoted as player 1, proposes
a share s [ [0,1] to the responders. There are 2, . . . , n responders
who observe s and decide simultaneously whether to accept or
reject s. Then a random draw selects with equal probability one of
the accepting responders. In case all responders reject s, all
players receive a monetary payoff of zero. In case of acceptance of
at least one responder , the proposer receives 12 s, and the
randomly selected responder gets paid s. All other responders
receive zero. Note that in this game there is competition in the
second stage of the game whereas in subsection III.B we have
competing players in the rst stage.
The prediction of the standard model with purely selsh
preferences for this game is again straightforward. Responders
accept any positive s and are indifferent between accepting and
rejecting s 5 0. Therefore, there is a unique subgame perfect
equilibrium outcome in which the proposer offers s 5 0 which is
accepted by at least one responder .
12 The results of Gu ¨ th, March-
and, and Rulliere [1997] show that the standard model captures
11. Rejection rates in Slovenia and the United States were signicantly
higher than rejection rates in Japan and Israel.
12. In the presence of a smallest money unit, e , there exists an additional,
slightly different equilibrium outcome: the proposer offers s 5 e which is accepted
by all the responders. To support this equilibrium, all responders have to reject
s 5 0. We assume, however , that there is no smallest money unit.
832
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
the regularities of this game rather well. The acceptance thresh-
olds of responders quickly converged to very low levels.13 Although
the game was repeated only ve times, in the nal period the
average acceptance threshold is well below 5 percent of the
available surplus, with 71 percent of the responders stipulating a
threshold of exactly zero and 9 percent a threshold of s8 5 0.02.
Likewise, in period 5 the average offer declined to 15 percent of
the available gains from trade. In view of the fact that proposers
had not been informed about responders’ previous acceptance
thresholds, such low offers are remarkable. In the nal period all
offers were below 25 percent, while in the ultimatum game such
low offers are very rare.14 To what extent is this apparent
willingness to make and to accept extremely low offers compatible
with the existence of inequity-averse subjects? As the following
proposition shows, our model can account for the above regularities.
PROPOSITION 3. Suppose that b 1 , (n2 1)/n. Then there exists a
subgame perfect equilibrium in which all responders accept
any s $ 0, and the proposer offers s 5 0. The highest offer s
that can be sustained in a subgame perfect equilibrium is
given by
(8) s 5 mini[ 2,...,n
Proof. See Appendix.
The rst part of Proposition 3 shows that responder competi-
tion always ensures the existence of an equilibrium in which all
the gains from trade are reaped by the proposer irrespective of the
prevailing amount of inequity aversion among the responders.
This result is not affected if there is incomplete information about
the types of players and is based on the following intuition. Given
that there is at least one other responder j who is going to accept
an offer of 0, there is no way for responder i to affect the outcome,
and he may just as well accept this offer, too. However, note that
the proposer will offer s 5 0 only if b 1 , (n2 1)/n. If there are n
13. The gains from trade were 50 French francs. Before observing the offer s,
each responder stated an acceptance threshold. If s was above the threshold, the
responder accepted the offer; if it was below , she rejected s.
14. Due to the gap between acceptance thresholds and offers, we conjecture
that the game had not yet reached a stable outcome after ve periods. The strong
and steady downward trend in all previous periods also indicates that a steady
state had not yet been reached. Recall that the market game of Roth et al. [1991]
was played for ten periods.
a i
(12 b i)(n2 1) 1 2a i 1 b i , 1
2 .
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 833
players altogether , than giving away one dollar to one of the
responders reduces inequality by 1 1 [1/(n2 1)]5 n/(n2 1)
dollars. Thus, if the nonpecuniary gain from this reduction in
inequality , b 1[n/(n2 1)], exceeds the cost of 1, player 1 prefers to
give money away to one of the responders. Recall that in the
bilateral ultimatum game the proposer offered an equal split if
b 1 . 0.5. An interesting aspect of our model is that an increase in
the number of responders renders s 5 0.5 less likely because it
increases the threshold b 1 has to pass.
The second part of Proposition 3, however, shows that there
may also be other equilibria. Clearly , a positive share s can be
sustained in a subgame perfect equilibrium only if all responders
can credibly threaten to reject any s8 , s. When is it optimal to
carry out this threat? Suppose that s , 0.5 has been offered and
that this offer is being rejected by all other responders j Þ i. In this
case responder i can enforce an egalitarian outcome by rejecting
the offer as well. Rejecting reduces not only the inequality toward
the other responders but also the disadvantageous inequality
toward the proposer . Therefore, responder i is willing to reject this
offer if nobody else accepts it and if the offer is sufficiently small,
i.e., if the disadvantageous inequality toward the proposer is
sufficiently large. More formally , given that all other responders
reject, responder i prefers to reject as well if and only if the utility
of acceptance obeys
(9) s2 a i
n2 1 (12 2s)2 n2 2
n2 1 b is # 0.
This is equivalent to
(10) s # s8
i ; a i
(12 b i)(n2 1) 1 2a i 1 b i
.
Thus, an offer s . 0 can be sustained if and only if (10) holds
for all responders. It is interesting to note that the highest
sustainable offer does not depend on all the parameters a i and b i
but only on the inequity aversion of the responder with the lowest
acceptance threshold s8
i. In particular, if there is only one re-
sponder with a i 5 0, Proposition 3 implies that there is a unique
equilibrium outcome with s 5 0. Furthermore, the acceptance
threshold is decreasing with n. Thus, the model makes the
intuitively appealing prediction that for n ` the highest
834
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
sustainable equilibrium offer converges to zero whatever the
prevailing amount of inequity aversion.15
D. Competition and Fairness
Propositions 2 and 3 suggest that there is a more general
principle at work that is responsible for the very limited role of
fairness considerations in the competitive environments consid-
ered above. Both propositions show that the introduction of
inequity aversion hardly affects the subgame perfect equilibrium
outcome in market games with proposer and responder competi-
tion relative to the prediction of the standard self-interest model.
In particular, Proposition 2 shows that competition between
proposers renders the distribution of preferences completely
irrelevant. It does not matter for the outcome whether there are
many or only a few subjects who exhibit strong inequity aversion.
By the same token it also does not matter whether the players
know or do not know the preference parameters of the other
players. The crucial observation in this game is that no single
player can enforce an equitable outcome. Given that there will be
inequality anyway , each proposer has a strong incentive to outbid
his competitors in order to turn part of the inequality to his
advantage and to increase his own monetary payoff. A similar
force is at work in the market game with responder competition.
As long as there is at least one responder who accepts everything,
no other responder can prevent an inequitable outcome. There-
fore, even very inequity-averse responders try to turn part of the
unavoidable inequality into inequality to their advantage by
accepting low offers. It is, thus, the impossibility of preventing
inequitable outcomes by individual players that renders inequity
aversion unimportant in equilibrium.
The role of this factor can be further highlighted by the
following slight modication of the market game with proposer
competition: suppose that at stage 2 the responder may accept any
of the offers made by the proposers; he is not forced to take the
highest offer. Furthermore, there is an additional stage 3 at which
the proposer who has been chosen by the responder at stage 2 can
decide whether he wants to stick to his offer or whether he wants
to withdraw—in which case all the gains from trade are lost for all
15. Note that the acceptance threshold is affected by the reference group. For
example, if each responder compares his payoff only with that of the proposer but
not with those of the other responders, then the acceptance threshold increases for
each responder , and a higher offer may be sustained in equilibrium.
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 835
parties. This game would be an interesting test for our theory of
inequity aversion. Clearly , in the standard model with selsh
preferences, these modications do not make any difference for
the subgame perfect equilibrium outcome. Also, if some players
have altruistic preferences in the sense that they appreciate any
increase in the monetary payoff of other players, the result
remains unchanged because altruistic players do not withdraw
the offer at stage 3. With inequity aversion the outcome will be
radically different, however. A proposer who is inequity averse
may want to destroy the entire surplus at stage 3 in order to
enforce an egalitarian outcome, in particular if he has a high a i
and if the split between himself and the responder is uneven. On
the other hand, an even split will be withdrawn by proposer i at
stage 3 only if b i . (n2 1)/(n2 2). Thus, the responder may prefer
to accept an offer si 5 0.5 rather than an offer sj . 0.5 because the
‘‘better’’ offer has a higher chance of being withdrawn. This in turn
reduces competition between proposers at stage 1. Thus, while
competition nullies the impact of inequity aversion in the
ordinary proposer competition game, inequity aversion greatly
diminishes the role of competition in the modied proposer
competition game. This change in the role of competition is caused
by the fact that in the modied game a single proposer can enforce
an equitable outcome.
We conclude that competition renders fairness considerations
irrelevant if and only if none of the competing players can punish
the monopolist by destroying some of the surplus and enforcing a
more equitable outcome. This suggests that fairness plays a
smaller role in most markets for goods16 than in labor markets.
This follows from the fact that, in addition to the rejection of low
wage offers, workers have some discretion over their work effort.
By varying their effort, they can exert a direct impact on the
relative material payoff of the employer . Consumers, in contrast,
have no similar option available. Therefore, a rm may be
reluctant to offer a low wage to workers who are competing for a
job if the employed worker has the opportunity to respond to a
low wage with low effort. As a consequence, fairness consider-
16. There are some markets for goods where fairness concerns play a role. For
example, World Series or NBA playoff tickets are often sold far below the
market-clearing price even though there is a great deal of competition among
buyers. This may be explained by long-term prot-maximizing considerations of
the monopolist who interacts repeatedly with groups of customers who care for fair
ticket prices. On this see also Kahnemann, Knetsch, and Thaler [1986].
836
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
ations may well give rise to wage rigidity and involuntary
unemployment.17
IV . COOPERATION AND RETALIATION: COOPERATION GAMES
In the previous section we have shown that our model can
account for the relatively ‘‘fair’’ outcomes in the bilateral ultima-
tum game as well as for the rather ‘‘unfair’’ or ‘‘competitive’’
outcomes in games with proposer or responder competition. In
this section we investigate the conditions under which coopera-
tion can ourish in the presence of inequity aversion. We show
that inequity aversion improves the prospects for voluntary
cooperation relative to the predictions of the standard model. In
particular, we show that there is an interesting class of conditions
under which the selsh model predicts complete defection, while
in our model there exist equilibria in which everybody cooperates
fully. But, there are also other cases where the predictions of our
model coincide with the predictions of the standard model.
We start with the following public good game. There are n $ 2
players who decide simultaneously on their contribution levels
gi [ [0, y], i [ 1, . . . , n , to the public good. Each player has an
endowment of y. The monetary payoff of player i is given by
n
(11) xi( g1, . . . , gn)5 y2 gi 1 a oj5 1
gj, 1/n , a , 1,
where a denotes the constant marginal return to the public good
G ; S j5 1
n gj. Since a , 1, a marginal investment into G causes a
monetary loss of (12 a); i.e., the dominant strategy of a com-
pletely selsh player is to choose gi 5 0. Thus, the standard model
predicts gi 5 0 for all i [ 1, . . . , n . However, since a . 1/n, the
aggregate monetary payoff is maximized if each player chooses
gi 5 y.
Consider now a slightly different public good game that
consists of two stages. At stage 1 the game is identical to the
previous game. At stage 2 each player i is informed about the
contribution vector ( g1, . . . , gn) and can simultaneously impose a
punishment on the other players; i.e., player i chooses a punish-
ment vector pi 5 ( pi1, . . . , pin), where pij $ 0 denotes the
punishment player i imposes on player j. The cost of this
17. Experimental evidence for this is provided by Fehr , Kirchsteiger , and
Riedl [1993] and Fehr and Falk [forthcoming]. We deal with these games in more
detail in Section VI.
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 837
punishment to player i is given by c S j5 1
n pij, 0 , c , 1. Player i,
however , may also be punished by the other players, which
generates an income loss to i of S j5 1
n pji. Thus, the monetary payoff
of player i is given by
n
(12) xi( g1, . . . , gn, p1, . . . , pn)5 y2 gi 1 a oj5 1
n
gj2 oj5 1
n
pji2 c oj5 1
pij.
What does the standard model predict for the two-stage
game? Since punishments are costly , players’ dominant strategy
at stage 2 is to not punish. Therefore, if selshness and rationality
are common knowledge, each player knows that the second stage
is completely irrelevant. As a consequence, players have exactly
the same incentives at stage 1 as they have in the one-stage game
without punishments, i.e., each player’s optimal strategy is still
given by gi 5 0. To what extent are these predictions of the
standard model consistent with the data from public good experi-
ments? For the one-stage game there are, fortunately , a large
number of experimental studies (see Table II). They investigate
the contribution behavior of subjects under a wide variety of
conditions. In Table II we concentrate on the behavior of subjects
in the nal period only , since we want to exclude the possibility of
repeated games effects. Furthermore, in the nal period we have
more condence that the players fully understand the game that
is being played.18
The striking fact revealed by Table II is that in the nal
period of n-person cooperation games (n . 3) without punishment
the vast majority of subjects play the equilibrium strategy of
complete free riding. If we average over all studies, 73 percent of
all subjects choose gi 5 0 in the nal period. It is also worth
mentioning that in addition to those subjects who play exactly the
equilibrium strategy there are very often a nonnegligible fraction
of subjects who play ‘‘close’’ to the equilibrium. In view of the facts
presented in Table II, it seems fair to say that the standard model
‘‘approximates’’ the choices of a big majority of subjects rather
well. However , if we turn to the public good game with punish-
ment, there emerges a radically different picture although the
standard model predicts the same outcome as in the one-stage
18. This point is discussed in more detail in Section V . Note that in some of the
studies summarized in Table II the group composition was the same for all T
periods (partner condition). In others, the group composition randomly changed
from period to period (stranger condition). However , in the last period subjects in
the partner condition also play a true one-shot public goods game. Therefore, Table
II presents the behavior from stranger as well as from partner experiments.
838
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE II
PERCENTAGE OF SUBJECTS WHO FREE RIDE COMPLETELY IN THE FINAL PERIOD OF A
REPEATED PUBLIC GOOD GAME
Study Country
Group
size (n)
Marginal
pecuniary
return (a)
T otal
number
of subjects
Percentage
of free
riders
(gi 5 0)
Isaac and W alker [1988] USA 4and10 0.3 42 83
Isaac and W alker [1988] USA 4and10 0.75 42 57
Andreoni [1988] USA 5 0.5 70 54
Andreoni [1995a] USA 5 0.5 80 55
Andreoni [1995b] USA 5 0.5 80 66
Croson [1995] USA 4 0.5 48 71
Croson [1996] USA 4 0.5 96 65
Keser and van Winden
[1996] Holland 4 0.5 160 84
Ockenfels and
Weimann [1996] Germany 5 0.33 200 89
Burlando and Hey
[1997] UK,Italy 6 0.33 120 66
Falkinger , Fehr ,
Ga ¨chter , and
Winter-Ebmer
[forthcoming] Switzerland 8 0.2 72 75
Falkinger , Fehr ,
Ga ¨chter , and
Winter-Ebmer
[forthcoming] Switzerland 16 0.1 32 84
Total number of subjects in all experiments and
percentage of complete free riding 1042 73
game. Figure II shows the distribution of contributions in the nal
period of the two-stage game conducted by Fehr and Ga ¨ chter
[1996]. Note that the same subjects generated the distribution in
the game without and in the game with punishment. Whereas in
the game without punishment most subjects play close to com-
plete defection, a strikingly large fraction of roughly 80 percent
cooperates fully in the game with punishment.19 Fehr and Ga ¨ chter
19. Subjects in the Fehr and Ga ¨ chter study participated in both conditions,
i.e., in the game with punishment and in the game without punishment. The
parameter values for a and n in this experiment are a 5 0.4 and n 5 4. It is
interesting to note that contributions are signicantly higher in the two-stage
game already in period 1. Moreover , in the one-stage game cooperation strongly
decreases over time, whereas in the two-stage game cooperation quickly converges
to the high levels observed in period 10.
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 839
FIGURE II
Distribution of Contributions in the Final Period of the Public Good Game with
Punishment (Source: Fehr and Ga ¨chter [1996])
report that the vast majority of punishments are imposed by
cooperators on the defectors and that lower contribution levels are
associated with higher received punishments. Thus, defectors do
not gain from free riding because they are being punished.
The behavior in the game with punishment represents an
unambiguous rejection of the standard model. This raises the
question whether our model is capable of explaining both the
evidence of the one-stage public good game and of the public good
game with punishment. Consider the one-stage public good game
rst. The prediction of our model is summarized in the following
proposition:
PROPOSITION 4.
(a) If a 1 b i , 1 for player i, then it is a dominant strategy for
that player to choose gi 5 0.
(b) Let k denote the number of players with a 1 1, 0 # k # n. If k/(n2 1) . a/2, then there is a unique equilib-
b i , rium with gi 5 0 for all i [ 1, . . . , n .
(c) If k/(n2 1) , (a 1 b j2 1)/(a j 1 b j) for all players j [
1, . . . , n with a 1 b j . 1, then other equilibria with
positive contribution levels do exist. In these equilibria all
k players with a 1 b i , 1 must choose gi 5 0, while all
other players contribute gj 5 g [ [0,y]. Note further that
(a 1 b j2 1)/(a j 1 b j) , a/2.
840
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
The formal proof of Proposition 4 is relegated to the Appendix.
To see the basic intuition for the above results, consider a player
with a 1 b i , 1. By spending one dollar on the public good, he
earns a dollars in monetary terms. In addition, he may get a
nonpecuinary benet of at most b i dollars from reducing inequal-
ity . Therefore, since a 1 b i , 1 for this player, it is a dominant
strategy for him to contribute nothing. Part (b) of the proposition
says that if the fraction of subjects, for whom gi 5 0 is a dominant
strategy , is sufficiently high, there is a unique equilibrium in
which nobody contributes. The reason is that if there are only a
few players with a 1 b i . 1, they would suffer too much from the
disadvantageous inequality caused by the free riders. The proof of
the proposition shows that if a potential contributor knows that
the number of free riders, k, is larger than a(n2 1)/2, then he will
not contribute either . The last part of the proposition shows that if
there are sufficiently many players with a 1 b i . 1, they can
sustain cooperation among themselves even if the other players do
not contribute. However , this requires that the contributors are
not too upset about the disadvantageous inequality toward the
free riders. Note that the condition k/(n2 1) , (a 1 b j2 1)/
(a j 1 b j) is less likely to be met as a j goes up. To put it differently,
the greater the aversion against being the sucker , the more
difficult it is to sustain cooperation in the one-stage game. We will
see below that the opposite holds true in the two-stage game.
Note that in almost all experiments considered in Table II,
a # 1/2. Thus, if the fraction of players with a 1 b i , 1 is larger
than 1 4, then there is no equilibrium with positive contribution
levels. This is consistent with the very low contribution levels that
have been observed in these experiments. Finally , it is worthwhile
mentioning that the prospects for cooperation are weakly increas-
ing with the marginal return a.
Consider now the public good game with punishment. To
what extent is our model capable of accounting for the very high
cooperation in the public good game with punishment? In the
context of our model the crucial point is that free riding generates
a material payoff advantage relative to those who cooperate. Since
c , 1, cooperators can reduce this payoff disadvantage by punish-
ing the free riders. Therefore, if those who cooperate are suffi-
ciently upset by the inequality to their disadvantage, i.e., if they
have sufficiently high a ’s, then they are willing to punish the
defectors even though this is costly to themselves. Thus, the
threat to punish free riders may be credible, which may induce
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 841
potential defectors to contribute at the rst stage of the game.
This is made precise in the following proposition.
PROPOSITION 5. Suppose that there is a group of n’ ‘‘conditionally
cooperative enforcers,’’ 1 # n’ # n, with preferences that obey
a 1 b i $ 1 and
(13) c , a i
(n2 1)(1 1 a i )2 (n8 2 1)(a i 1 b i )
for all i [ 1, . . . , n8
.
whereas all other players do not care about inequality; i.e.,
a i 5 b i 5 0 for i [ n’ 1 1, . . . , n . Then the following
strategies, which describe the players’ behavior on and off the
equilibrium path, form a subgame perfect equilibrium.
c In the rst stage each player contributes gi 5 g [ [0, y].
c If each player does so, there are no punishments in the
second stage. If one of the players i [ n’ 1 1, . . . , n
deviates and chooses gi , g, then each enforcer j [
1, . . . , n’ chooses pji 5 ( g2 gi )/(n’ 2 c) while all other
players do not punish. If one of the ‘‘conditionally coopera-
tive enforcers’’ chooses gi , g, or if any player chooses gi . g, or if more than one player deviated from g, then one
Nash-equilibrium of the punishment game is being played.
Proof. See Appendix.
(n’ 5 Proposition 5 shows that full cooperation, as observed in the
experiments by Fehr and Ga ¨ chter [1996], can be sustained as an
equilibrium outcome if there is a group of n’ ‘‘conditionally
cooperative enforcers.’’ In fact, one such enforcer may be enough
1) if his preferences satisfy c , a i /(n2 1)(1 1 a i) and a 1 b i $ 1; i.e., if there is one person who is sufficiently concerned
about inequality. To see how the equilibrium works, consider such
a ‘‘conditionally cooperative enforcer.’’ For him a 1 b i $ 1, so he is
happy to cooperate if all others cooperate as well (this is why he is
called ‘‘conditionally cooperative’’). In addition, condition (13)
makes sure that he cares sufficiently about inequality to his
disadvantage. Thus, he can credibly threaten to punish a defector
(this is why he is called ‘‘enforcer’’). Note that condition (13) is less
demanding if n’ or a i increases. The punishment is constructed
such that the defector gets the same monetary payoff as the
enforcers. Since this is less than what a defector would have
received if he had chosen gi 5 g, a deviation is not protable.
842
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
If the conditions of Proposition 5 are met, then there exists a
continuum of equilibrium outcomes. This continuum includes the
‘‘good equilibrium’’ with maximum contributions but also the ‘‘bad
equilibrium’’ where nobody contributes to the public good. In our
view , however, there is a reasonable renement argument that
rules out ‘‘bad’’ equilibria with low contributions. To see this, note
that the equilibrium with the highest possible contribution level,
gi 5 g5 y for all i [ 1, . . . , n , is the unique symmetric and
efficient outcome. Since it is symmetric, it yields the same payoff
for all players. Hence, this equilibrium is a natural focal point that
serves as a coordination device even if the subjects choose their
strategies independently .
Comparing Propositions 4 and 5, it is easy to see that the
prospects for cooperation are greatly improved if there is an
opportunity to punish defectors. Without punishments all players
with a 1 b i , 1 will never contribute. Players with a 1 b i . 1 may
contribute only if they care enough about inequality to their
advantage but not too much about disadvantageous inequality. On
the other hand, with punishment all players will contribute if
there is a (small) group of ‘‘conditionally cooperative enforcers.’’
The more these enforcers care about disadvantageous inequality ,
the more they are prepared to punish defectors which makes it
easier to sustain cooperation. In fact, one person with a suffi-
ciently high a i is already enough to enforce efficient contributions
by all other players.
Before we turn to the next section, we would like to point out
an implication of our model for the Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD). Note
that the simultaneous PD is just a special case of the public good
game without punishment for n 5 2 and gi [ 0, y , i5 1,2.
Therefore, Proposition 4 applies; i.e., cooperation is an equilib-
rium if both players meet the condition a 1 b i . 1. Yet, if only one
player meets this condition, defection of both players is the unique
equilibrium. In contrast, in a sequentially played PD a purely
selsh rst mover has an incentive to contribute if he faces a
second mover who meets a 1 b i . 1. This is so because the second
mover will respond cooperatively to a cooperative rst move while
he defects if the rst mover defects. Thus, due to the reciprocal
behavior of inequity-averse second movers, cooperation rates
among rst movers in sequentially played PDs are predicted to be
higher than cooperation rates in simultaneous PDs. There is fairly
strong evidence in favor of this prediction. Watabe, Terai, Haya-
shi, and Yamagishi [1996] and Hayashi, Ostrom, Walker , and
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 843
Yamagishi [1998] show that cooperation rates among rst movers
in sequential PDs are indeed much higher and that reciprocal
cooperation of second movers is very frequent.
V . PREDICTIONS ACROSS GAMES
In this section we examine whether the distribution of
parameters that is consistent with experimental observations in
the ultimatum game is consistent with the experimental evidence
from the other games. It is not our aim here to show that our
theory is consistent with 100 percent of the individual choices.
The objective is rather to offer a rst test for whether there is a
chance that our theory is consistent with the quantitative evi-
dence from different games. Admittedly , this test is rather crude.
However , at the end of this section we make a number of
predictions that are implied by our model, and we suggest how
these predictions can be tested rigorously with some new
experiments.
In many of the experiments referred to in this section, the
subjects had to play the same game several times either with the
same or with varying opponents. Whenever available, we take the
data of the nal period as the facts to be explained. There are two
reasons for this choice. First, it is well-known in experimental
economics that in interactive situations one cannot expect the
subjects to play an equilibrium in the rst period already. Yet, if
subjects have the opportunity to repeat their choices and to better
understand the strategic interaction, then very often rather stable
behavioral patterns, that may differ substantially from rst-period-
play, emerge. Second, if there is repeated interaction between the
same opponents, then there may be repeated games effects that
come into play. These effects can be excluded if we look at the last
period only .
Table III suggests a simple discrete distribution of a i and b i.
We have chosen this distribution because it is consistent with the
large experimental evidence we have on the ultimatum game (see
Table I above and Roth [1995]). Recall from Proposition 1 that for
any given a i, there exists an acceptance threshold s8(a i)5 a i /(1 1 2a i) such that player i accepts s if and only if s $ s8(a i ). In
all experiments there is a fraction of subjects that rejects offers
even if they are very close to an equal split. Thus, we (conserva-
tively) assume that 10 percent of the subjects have a 5 4 which
implies an acceptance threshold of s8 5 4/95 0.444. Another,
844
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE III
ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE DISTRIBUTION OF PREFERENCES
DISTRIBUTION OF a ’s AND
ASSOCIATED ACCEPTANCE
THRESHOLDS OF BUYERS
DISTRIBUTION OF b’s AND
ASSOCIATED OPTIMAL OFFERS
OF SELLERS
a 5 0 30 percent s8 5 0 b 5 0 30 percent s* 5 1 /3
a 5 0.5 30 percent s8(0.5)5 1 /4 b 5 0.25 30 percent s* 5 4 /9
a 5 1 30 percent s8 (1)5 1 /3 b 5 0.6 40 percent s* 5 1 /2
a 5 4 10 percent s8 (4)5 4 /9
typically much larger fraction of the population insists on getting
at least one-third of the surplus, which implies a value of a which
is equal to one. These are at least 30 percent of the population.
Note that they are prepared to give up one dollar if this reduces
the payoff of their opponent by two dollars. Another, say, 30
percent of the subjects insist on getting at least one-quarter ,
which implies that a 5 0.5. Finally , the remaining 30 percent of
the subjects do not care very much about inequality and are happy
to accept any positive offer (a 5 0).
If a proposer does not know the parameter a of his opponent
but believes that the probability distribution over a is given by
Table III, then it is straightforward to compute his optimal offer as
a function of his inequality parameter b. The optimal offer is given
by
0.5 if b i . 0.5
(14) s*(b )5
0.4 if 0.235 , b i , 0.5
0.3 if b i , 0.235.
Note that it is never optimal to offer less than one-third of the
surplus, even if the proposer is completely selsh. If we look at the
actual offers made in the ultimatum game, there are roughly 40
percent of the subjects who suggest an equal split. Another 30
percent offer s [ [0.4, 0.5), while 30 percent offer less than 0.4.
There are hardly any offers below 0.25. This gives us the distribu-
tion of b in the population described in Table III.
Let us now see whether this distribution of preferences is
consistent with the observed behavior in other games. Clearly , we
have no problem in explaining the evidence on market games with
proposer competition. Any distribution of a and b yields the
competitive outcome that is observed by Roth et al. [1991] in all
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 845
their experiments. Similarly , in the market game with responder
competition, we know from Proposition 3 that if there is at least
one responder who does not care about disadvantageous inequal-
ity (i.e., a i 5 0), then there is a unique equilibrium outcome with
s 5 0. With ve responders in the experiments by Gu ¨ th, March-
and, and Rulliere [1997] and with the distribution of types from
Table III, the probability that there is at least one such player in
each group is given by 1–0.75 5 83 percent. This is roughly
consistent with the fact that 71 percent of the players accepted an
offer of zero, and 9 percent had an acceptance threshold of s8 5 0.02 in the nal period.
Consider now the public good game. We know by Proposition
4 that cooperation can be sustained as an equilibrium outcome
only if the number k of players with a 1 b i , 1 obeys k/(n2 1) , a/2. Thus, our theory predicts that there is less cooperation the
smaller a which is consistent with the empirical evidence of Isaac
and Walker [1988] presented in Table II.20 In a typical treatment
a 5 0.5, and n 5 4. Therefore, if all players believe that there is at
least one player with a 1 b i , 1, then there is a unique
equilibrium with gi 5 0 for all players. Given the distribution of
preferences of Table III, the probability that there are four players
with b . 0.5 is equal to 0.44 5 2.56 percent. Hence, we should
observe that, on average, almost all individuals fully defect. A
similar result holds for most other experiments in Table II. Except
for the Isaac and Walker experiments with n 5 10 a single player
with a 1 b i , 1 is sufficient for the violation of the necessary
condition for cooperation, k/(n2 1) , a/2. Thus, in all these
experiments our theory predicts that randomly chosen groups are
almost never capable of sustaining cooperation. Table II indicates
that this is not quite the case, although 73 percent of individuals
indeed choose gi 5 0. Thus, it seems fair to say that our model is
consistent with the bulk of individual choices in this game.21
Finally , the most interesting experiment from the perspective
of our theory is the public good game with punishment. While in
20. For a 5 0.75.
0.3, the rate of defection is substantially larger than for a 5 The Isaac and Walker experiments were explicitly designed to test for the effects of
variations in a.
21. When judging the accuracy of the model, one should also take into account
that there is in general a signicant fraction of the subjects that play close to
complete free riding in the nal round. A combination of our model with the view
that human choice is characterized by a fundamental randomness [McKelvey and
Palfrey 1995; Anderson, Goeree, and Holt 1997] may explain much of the
remaining 25 percent of individual choices. This task, however , is left for future
research.
846
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
the game without punishment most subjects play close to com-
plete defection, a strikingly large fraction of roughly 80 percent
cooperate fully in the game with punishment. To what extent can
our model explain this phenomenon? We know from Proposition 5
that cooperation can be sustained if there is a group of n’
‘‘conditionally cooperative enforcers’’ with preferences that satisfy
(13) and a 1 b i $ 1. For example, if all four players believe that
there is at least one player with a i $ 1.5 and b i $ 0.6, there is an
equilibrium in which all four players contribute the maximum
amount. As discussed in Section V , this equilibrium is a natural
focal point. Since the computation of the probability that the
conditions of Proposition 5 are met is a bit more cumbersome, we
have put them in the Appendix. It turns out that for the preference
distribution given in Table III the probability that a randomly
drawn group of four players meets the conditions is 61.1 percent.
Thus, our model is roughly consistent with the experimental
evidence of Fehr and Ga ¨ chter [1996].22
Clearly , the above computations provide only rough evidence
in favor of our model. To rigorously test the model, additional
experiments have to be run. We would like to suggest a few
variants of the experiments discussed so far that would be
particularly interesting:23
c Our model predicts that under proposer competition two
proposers are sufficient for s 5 1 to be the unique equilib-
rium outcome irrespective of the players’ preferences. Thus,
one could conduct the proposer competition game with two
proposers that have proved to be very inequity averse in
other games. This would constitute a particularly tough
test of our model.
c Most public good games that have been conducted had
symmetric payoffs. Our theory suggests that it will be more
difficult to sustain cooperation if the game is asymmetric.
For example, if the public good is more valuable to some of
the players, there will in general be a conict between
efficiency and equality . Our prediction is that if the game is
sufficiently asymmetric it is impossible to sustain coopera-
tion even if a is very large or if players can use punishments.
22. In this context one has to take into account that the total number of
available individual observations in the game with punishment is much smaller
than for the game without punishment or for the ultimatum game. Future
experiments will have to show whether the Fehr-Ga ¨ chter results are the rule in
the punishment game or whether they exhibit unusually high cooperation rates.
23. We are grateful to a referee who suggested some of these tests.
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 847
c It would be interesting to repeat the public good experi-
ment with punishments for different values of a, c, and n.
Proposition 5 suggests that we should observe less coopera-
tion if a goes down and if c goes up. The effect of an increase
in the group size n is ambiguous, however . For any given
player it becomes more difficult to satisfy condition (13) as
n goes up. On the other hand, the larger the group, the
higher is the probability that there is at least one person
with a very high a . Our conjecture is that a moderate
change in the size of the group does not affect the amount of
cooperation.
c One of the most interesting tests of our theory would be to
do several different experiments with the same group of
subjects. Our model predicts a cross-situation correlation
in behavior. For example, the observations from one experi-
ment could be used to estimate the parameters of the
utility function of each individual. It would then be possible
to test whether this individual’s behavior in other games is
consistent with his estimated utility function.
c In a similar fashion, one could screen subjects according to
their behavior in one experiment before doing a public good
experiment with punishments. If we group the subjects in
this second experiment according to their observed inequal-
ity aversion, the prediction is that those groups with high
inequality aversion will contribute while those with low
inequality aversion will not.
VI. DICTATOR AND GIFT EXCHANGE GAMES
The preceding sections have shown that our very simple
model of linear inequality aversion is consistent, with the most
important facts in ultimatum, market, and cooperation games.
One problem with our approach, however, is that it yields too
extreme predictions in some other games, such as the ‘‘dictator
game.’’ The dictator game is a two-person game in which only
player 1, the ‘‘dictator,’’ has to make a decision. Player 1 has to
decide what share s [ [0,1] of a given amount of money to pass on
to player 2. For a given share s monetary payoffs are given by x1 5 12 s and x2 5 s, respectively . Obviously , the standard model
predicts s 5 0. In contrast, in the experimental study of Forsythe,
Horowitz, Savin, and Sefton [1994] only about 20 percent of
subjects chose s 5 0, 60 percent chose 0 , s , 0.5, and again
848
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
roughly 20 percent chose s 5 0.5. In the study by Andreoni and
Miller [1995] the distribution of shares is again bimodal but puts
more weight on the ‘‘extremes:’’ approximately 40 percent of the
subjects gave s 5 0, 20 percent gave 0 , s , 0.5, and roughly 40
percent gave s 5 0.5. Shares above s 5 0.5 were practically never
observed.
Our model predicts that player 1 offers s 5 0.5 if b 1 . 0.5 and
s 5 0 if b 1 , 0.5. Thus, we should observe only very ‘‘fair’’ or very
‘‘unfair’’ outcomes, a prediction that is clearly refuted by the data.
However , there is a straightforward solution to this problem. We
assumed that the inequity aversion is piecewise linear . The
linearity assumption was imposed in order to keep our model as
simple as possible. If we allow for a utility function that is concave
in the amount of advantageous inequality, there is no problem in
generating optimal offers that are in the interior of [0,0.5].
It is important to note that nonlinear inequity aversion does
not affect the qualitative results in the other games we consid-
ered. This is straightforward in market games with proposer or
responder competition. Recall that in the context of proposer
competition there exists a unique equilibrium outcome in which
the responder receives the whole gains from trade irrespective of
the prevailing amount of inequity aversion. Thus, it also does not
matter whether linear or nonlinear inequity aversion prevails.
Likewise, under responder competition there is a unique equilib-
rium outcome in which the proposer receives the whole surplus if
there is at least one responder who does not care about disadvan-
tageous inequality. Obviously , this proposition holds irrespective
of whether the inequity aversion of the other responders is linear
or not. Similar arguments hold for public good games with and
without punishment. Concerning the public good game with
punishment, for example, the existence of nonlinear inequity
aversion obviously does not invalidate the existence of an equilib-
rium with full cooperation. It only renders the condition for the
existence of such an equilibrium, i.e., condition (13), slightly more
complicated.
Another interesting game is the so-called trust- or gift
exchange game [Fehr, Kirchsteiger, and Riedl 1993; Berg, Dick-
haut, and McCabe 1995; Fehr , Ga ¨ chter, and Kirchsteiger 1997].
The common feature of trust- or gift exchange games is that they
resemble a sequentially played PD with more than two actions for
each player. In some experiments the gift exchange game has been
embedded in a competitive experimental market. For example, a
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 849
slightly simplied version of the experiment conducted by Fehr ,
Ga ¨ chter, and Kirchsteiger [1997] has the following structure.
There is one experimental rm, which we denote as player 1, and
which can make a wage offer w to the experimental workers.
There are 2, . . . , n workers who can simultaneously accept or
reject w. Then a random draw selects with equal probability one of
the accepting workers. Thereafter, the selected worker has to
choose effort e from the interval [e,e], 0 , e , e. In case that all
workers reject w, all players receive nothing. In case of acceptance
the rm receives xf5 ve2 w, where v denotes the marginal
product of effort. The worker receives xw 5 w2 c(e), where c(e)
denotes the effort costs and obeys c(e)5 c8(e)5 0 and c8 . 0, c9 . 0
for e . e. Moreover, v . c8(e) so that e 5 e is the efficient effort level.
This game is essentially a market game with responder competi-
tion in which an accepting responder has to make an effort choice
after he is selected.
If all players are pure money maximizers, the prediction for
this game is straightforward. Since the selected worker always
chooses the minimum effort e, the game collapses into a responder
competition game with gains from trade equal to ve. In equilib-
rium the rm earns ve and w 5 0. Y et, since v . c8(e), there exist
many (w,e)-combinations that would make both the rm and the
selected worker better off. In sharp contrast to this prediction, and
also in sharp contrast to what is observed under responder
competition without effort choices, rms offer substantial wages to
the workers, and wages do not decrease over time. Moreover ,
workers provide effort above e and there is a strong positive
correlation between w and e.
To what extent can our model explain this outcome? Put
differently, why is it the case that under responder competition
without effort choice the responders’ income converges toward the
selsh solution, whereas under responder competition with effort
choice, wages substantially above the selsh solution can be
maintained. From the viewpoint of our model the key fact is
that—by varying the effort choice—the randomly selected worker
has the opportunity to affect the difference xf2 xw. If the rm
offers ‘‘low’’ wages such that xf . xw holds at any feasible effort
level, the selected worker will always choose the minimum effort.
However , if the rm offers a ‘‘high’’ wage such that at e the
inequality xw . xf holds, inequity-averse workers with a suffi-
ciently high b i are willing to raise e above e. Moreover , in the
presence of nonlinear inequity aversion, higher wages will be
850
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
associated with higher effort levels. The reason is that by raising
the effort workers can move in the direction of more equitable
outcomes. Thus, our model is capable of explaining the apparent
wage rigidity observed in gift exchange games. Since the presence
of inequity-averse workers generates a positive correlation be-
tween wages and effort, the rm does not gain by exploiting the
competition among the workers. Instead, it has an incentive to
pay efficiency wages above the competitive level.
VII. EXTENSIONS AND POSSIBLE OBJECTIONS
So far, we ruled out the existence of subjects who like to be
better off than others. This is unsatisfactory because subjects with
b i , 0 clearly exist. Fortunately , however, such subjects have
virtually no impact on equilibrium behavior in the games consid-
ered in this paper. To see this, suppose that a fraction of subjects
with b i 5 0 exhibits b i , 0 instead. This obviously does not change
responders’ behavior in the ultimatum game because for them
only a i matters. It also does not change the proposer behavior in
the complete information case because both proposers with b i 5 0
and those with b i , 0 will make an offer that exactly matches the
responder’s acceptance threshold.24 In the market game with
proposer competition, proposers with b i , 0 are even more willing
to overbid a going share below s 5 1, compared with subjects with b i 5 0, because by overbidding they gain a payoff advantage
relative to the other proposers. Thus, Proposition 2 remains
unchanged. Similar arguments apply to the case of responder
competition (without effort choices) because a responder with b i , 0 is even more willing to underbid a positive share compared with
a responder with b i 5 0. In the public good game without
punishment all players with a 1 b i , 1 have a dominant strategy
to contribute nothing. It does not matter whether these players
exhibit a positive or a negative b i. Finally , the existence of types
with b i , 0 also leaves Proposition 5 unchanged.25 If there are
sufficiently many conditionally cooperative enforcers, it does not
24. It may affect proposer behavior in the incomplete information case
although the effect of a change in b i is ambiguous. This ambiguity stems from the
fact that the proposer’s marginal expected utility of s may rise or fall if b i falls.
25. This holds true if, for those with a negative b i, the absolute value of b i is
not too large. Otherwise, defectors would have an incentive to punish the
cooperators. A defector who imposes a punishment of one on a cooperator gains
[2 b i /(n2 1)](12 c) . 0 in nonpecuniary terms and has material costs of c. Thus,
he is willing to punish if b i $ [c/(12 c)](n2 1) holds. This means that only
defectors with implausibly high absolute values of b i are willing to punish. For
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 851
matter whether the remaining players have b i , 0 or not. Recall
that—according to Proposition 5—strategies that discipline poten-
tial defectors make the enforcers and the defectors equally well off
in material terms. Hence, a defector cannot gain a payoff advan-
tage but is even worse off relative to a cooperating nonenforcer.
These punishment strategies, therefore, are sufficient to disci-
pline potential defectors irrespective of their b i-values.
Another set of questions concerns the choice of the reference
group. As argued in Section II, for many laboratory experiments
our assumption that subjects compare themselves with all other
subjects in the (usually relatively small) group is a natural
starting point. However, we are aware of the possibility that this
may not always be an appropriate assumption.26 There may well
be interactive structures in which some agents have a salient
position that makes them natural reference agents. Moreover , the
social context and the institutional environment in which interac-
tions take place is likely to be important.27 Bewley [1998], for
example, reports that in nonunionized rms workers compare
themselves exclusively with their rm and with other workers in
their rm. This suggests that only within-rm social comparisons
but not across-rm comparisons affect the wage-setting process.
This is likely to be different in unionized sectors because unions
make across-rm and even across-sector comparisons. Babcock,
Wang, and Loewenstein [1996], for example, provide evidence
that wage bargaining between teachers’ unions and school boards
is strongly affected by reference wages in other school districts.
An obvious limitation of our model is that it cannot explain
the evolution of play over time in the experiments discussed.
Instead, our examination aims at the explanation of the stable
behavioral patterns that emerge in these experiments after
several periods. It is clear, that a model that solely focuses on
equilibrium behavior cannot explain the time path of play. This
limitation of our model also precludes a rigorous analysis of the
example, for c 5 0.5 and n 5 4, b i $ 3 is required. For c 5 0.2 and n 5 4, b i still
has to exceed 0.75.
26. Bolton and Ockenfels [1997] develop a model similar to ours that differs in
the choice of the reference payoff. In their model subjects compare themselves only
with the average payoff of the group.
27. A related issue is the impact of social context on a person’s degree of
inequity aversion. It seems likely that a person has a different degree of inequity
aversion when interacting with a friend in personal matters than in a business
transaction with a stranger. In fact, evidence for this is provided by Loewenstein,
Thompson, and Bazerman [1989]. However, note that in all experiments consid-
ered above interaction took place among anonymous strangers in a neutrally
framed context.
852
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
short-run impact of equity considerations.28 The empirical evi-
dence suggests that equity considerations also have important
short-run effects. This is obvious in ultimatum games, public good
games with punishment, and gift exchange games, where equity
considerations lead to substantial deviations from the selsh
solution in the short and in the long run. However, they also seem
to play a short-run role in market games with proposer or
responder competition or public good games without punishment;
that is, in games in which the selsh solution prevails in the long
run. In these games the short-run deviation from equilibrium is
typically in the direction of more equitable outcomes.29
VIII. RELATED APPROACHES IN THE LITERATURE
There are several alternative approaches that try to account
for persistent deviations from the predictions of the self-interest
model by assuming a different motivational structure. The ap-
proach pioneered by Rabin [1993] emphasizes the role of inten-
tions as a source of reciprocal behavior. Rabin’s approach has
recently been extended in interesting ways by Falk and Fisch-
bacher [1998] and Dufwenberg and Kirchsteiger [1998]. Andreoni
and Miller [1995] is based on the assumption of altruistic motives.
Another interesting approach is Levine [1997] who assumes that
people are either spiteful or altruistic to various degrees. Finally ,
there is the approach by Bolton and Ockenfels [1997] that is, like
our model, based on a kind of inequity aversion.
The theory of reciprocity as developed by Rabin [1993] rests
on the idea that people are willing to reward fair intentions and to
punish unfair intentions. Like our approach, Rabin’s model is also
based on the notion of equity: player j perceives player i’s
intention as unfair if player i chooses an action that gives j less
28. In the short-run, minor changes in the (experimental) context can affect
behavior. For example, there is evidence that subjects contribute more in a
one-shot PD if it is called ‘‘community game’’ than if it is called ‘‘Wall Street Game.’’
Under the plausible assumption that the community frame triggers more optimis-
tic beliefs about other subjects inequity aversion our model is consistent with this
observation.
29. Such short-run effects also are suggested by the results of Kahneman,
Knetsch, and Thaler [1986] and Franciosi et al. [1995]. Franciosi et al. show
that—in a competitive experimental market (without effort choices)—equity
considerations signicantly retard the adjustment to the (selsh) equilibrium.
Ultimately , however , they do not prevent full adjustment to the equilibrium. Note
that the retardation effect suggests that temporary demand shocks (e.g., after a
natural disaster) may have no impact on prices at all because the shock vanishes
before competitive forces can overcome the fairness-induced resistance to price
changes.
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 853
than the equitable material payoff. The advantage of his model is
that the disutility of an unfair offer can be explicitly interpreted as
arising from j’s judgment about i’s unfair intention. As a conse-
quence, player j’s response to i’s action can be explicitly inter-
preted as arising from j’s desire to punish an unfair intention
while our model does not explicitly suggest this interpretation of
j’s response. On the other hand, disadvantages of Rabin’s model
are that it is restricted to two-person normal form games and that
it gives predictions if it is applied to the normal form of important
sequential move games.30
The lack of explicit modeling of intentions in our model does,
however , not imply that the model is incompatible with an
intentions-based interpretation of reciprocal behavior. In our
model reciprocal behavior is driven by the preference parameters
a i and b i. The model is silent as to why a i and b i are positive.
Whether these parameters are positive because individuals care
directly for inequality or whether they infer intentions from
actions that cause unequal outcomes is not modeled. Yet, this
means that positive a i
’s and b i
’s can be interpreted as a direct
concern for equality as well as a reduced-form concern for
intentions. An intentions-based interpretation of our preference
parameters is possible because bad or good intentions behind an
action are, in general, inferred from the equity implications of the
action. Therefore, people who have a desire to punish a bad
intention behave as if they dislike being worse off relative to an
equitable reference point and people who reward good intentions
behave as if they dislike being better off relative to an equitable
reference point. As a consequence, our preference parameters are
compatible with the interpretation of intentions-driven reciprocity .
To illustrate this point further consider, e.g., an ultimatum
game that is played under two different conditions [Blount 1995].
c In the ‘‘random’’ condition the rst mover’s offer is deter-
mined by a random device. The responder knows how the
30. In the sequentially played Prisoner’s Dilemma, Rabin’s model predicts
that unconditional cooperation by the second mover is part of an equilibrium; i.e.,
the second mover cooperates even if the rst mover defects. Moreover , conditional
cooperation by the second mover is not part of an equilibrium. The data in Watabe
et al. [1996] and Hayashi et al. [1998], however, show that unconditional
cooperation is virtually nonexistent while conditional cooperation is the rule.
Likewise, in the gift exchange game workers behave conditionally cooperative
while unconditional cooperation is nonexistent. The reciprocity approaches of Falk
and Fischbacher [1998] and of Dufwenberg and Kirchsteiger [1998] do not share
this disadvantage of Rabin’s model.
854
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
offer is generated and that the proposer cannot be held
responsible for it.
c In the ‘‘intention’’ condition the proposer makes the offer
himself and the responder knows that this is the proposer’s
deliberate choice.
In the intention condition the responder may not only be
directly concerned about inequity . He may also react to the
fairness of the perceived intentions of the proposer . In contrast, in
the random condition it is only the concern for pure equity that
may affect the responder’s behavior. In fact, Blount [1995] reports
that there are responders who reject positive but unequal offers in
both conditions. However, the acceptance threshold is signi-
cantly higher in the intention condition.31 Recall from Proposition
1 that there is a monotonic relationship between the acceptance
threshold and the parameter a i. Thus, this result suggests that
the preference parameters do not remain constant across random
and intention condition. Yet, for all games played in the intention
condition and, hence, for all games considered in the previous
sections, the preference parameters should be constant across
games.
Altruism is consistent with voluntary giving in dictator and
public good games. It is, however , inconsistent with the rejection
of offers in the ultimatum game, and it cannot explain the huge
behavioral differences between public good games with and
without punishment. It also seems difficult to reconcile the
extreme outcomes in market games with altruism. Levine’s
approach can explain extreme outcomes in market games as well
as the evidence in the centipede game, but it cannot explain
positive giving in the dictator game. It also seems that Levine’s
approach has difficulties in explaining that the same subjects
behave very noncooperatively in the public good game without
punishment, while they behave very cooperatively in the game
with punishment.
The approach by Bolton and Ockenfels [1997] is similar to our
model, although there are some differences in the details. For
example, in their model people compare their material payoff with
the material average payoff of the group. In our view the appropri-
ate choice of the reference payoff is ultimately an empirical
31. Similar evidence is given by Charness [forthcoming] for a gift exchange
game. For further evidence in favor of intentions-driven reciprocity , see Bolle and
Kritikos [1998]. Surprisingly , and in contrast to these studies, Bolton, Brandts,
and Katok [1997] and Bolton, Brandts, and Ockenfels [1997] nd no evidence for
intentions-driven reciprocity .
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 855
question that cannot be solved on the basis of the presently
available evidence. There may well be situations in which the
average payoff is the appropriate choice. However , in the context
of the public good game with punishment, it seems to be inappro-
priate because it cannot explain why cooperators want to punish a
defector . If there are, say , n2 1 fully cooperating subjects and one
fully defecting subject, the payoff of each cooperator is below the
group’s average payoff. Cooperators can reduce this difference
between own payoff and the group’s average payoff by punishing
one of the other players, i.e., they are indifferent between punish-
ing other cooperators and the defector .
Bolton and Ockenfels [1997] assume that the marginal
disutility of small deviations from equality is zero. Therefore, if
subjects are nonsatiated in their own material payoff they will
never propose an equal split in the dictator game. Likewise, they
will—in case of nonsatiation in material payoffs—never propose
an equal split in the ultimatum game unless a 2 5 ` for sufficiently
many responders. Typically, the modal offer in most ultimatum
game experiments is, however , the equal split. In addition, the
assumption implies that complete free riding is the unique
equilibrium in the public good game without punishment for all
a , 1 and all n $ 2. Their approach thus rules out equilibria
where only a fraction of all subjects cooperate.32
IX. SUMMARY
There are situations in which the standard self-interest
model is unambiguously refuted. However , in other situations the
predictions of this model seem to be very accurate. For example, in
simple experiments like the ultimatum game, the public good
game with punishments, or the gift exchange game, the vast
majority of the subjects behave in a ‘‘fair’’ and ‘‘cooperative’’
manner although the self-interest model predicts very ‘‘unfair’’
and ‘‘noncooperative’’ behavior. Y et, there are also experiments
like, e.g., market games or public good games without punish-
ment, in which the vast majority of the subjects behaves in a
rather ‘‘unfair’’ and ‘‘noncooperative’’ way—as predicted by the
self-interest model. We show that this puzzling evidence can be
explained in a coherent framework if—in addition to purely
selsh people—there is a fraction of the population that cares for
32. Persistent asymmetric contributions are observed in Isaac, Walker , and
Williams [1994].
856
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
equitable outcomes. Our theory is motivated by the psychological
evidence on social comparison and loss aversion. It is very simple
and can be applied to any game. The predictions of our model are
consistent with the empirical evidence on all of the above-
mentioned games. Our theory also has strong empirical implica-
tions for many other games. Therefore, it is an important task for
future research to test the theory more rigorously against compet-
ing hypotheses. In addition, we believe that future research
should aim at formalizing the role of intentions explicitly for the
n-person case.
A main insight of our analysis is that there is an important
interaction between the distribution of preferences in a given
population and the strategic environment. We have shown that
there are environments in which the behavior of a minority of
purely selsh people forces the majority of fair-minded people to
behave in a completely selsh manner , too. For example, in a
market game with proposer or responder competition, it is very
difficult, if not impossible, for fair players to achieve a ‘‘fair’’
outcome. Likewise, in a simultaneous public good game with
punishment, even a small minority of selsh players can trigger
the unraveling of cooperation. Y et, we have also shown that a
minority of fair-minded players can force a big majority of selsh
players to cooperate fully in the public good game with punish-
ment. Similarly , our examination of the gift exchange game
indicates that fairness considerations may give rise to stable wage
rigidity despite the presence of strong competition among the
workers. Thus, competition may or may not nullify the impact of
equity considerations. If, despite the presence of competition,
single individuals have opportunities to affect the relative mate-
rial payoffs, equity considerations will affect market outcomes
even in very competitive environments. In our view these results
suggest that the interaction between the distribution of prefer-
ences and the economic environment deserves more attention in
future research.
APPENDIX
Proof of Proposition 2
We rst show that it is indeed a subgame perfect equilibrium
if at least two proposers offer s 5 1 which is accepted by the
responder . Note rst that the responder will accept any offer s $
s 5 A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 857
0.5, because
(A1) s2 1
n2 1 b i(s2 1 1 s)2 n2 2
n2 1 b i(s2 0) $ 0.
To see this, note that (A1) is equivalent to
(A2) (n2 1) s $ b i (ns2 1).
Since b i # 1, this inequality clearly holds if
(A3) (n2 1) s $ ns2 1,
which must be the case since s # 1. Hence, the buyer will accept
1. Given that there is at least one other proposer who offers s 5 1 and given that this offer will be accepted, each proposer gets a
monetary payoff of 0 anyway, and no proposer can affect this
outcome. Hence, it is indeed optimal for at least one other
proposer to offer s 5 1, too.
Next, we show that this is the unique equilibrium outcome.
Suppose that there is another equilibrium in which s , 1 with
positive probability. This is only possible if each proposer offers
s , 1 with positive probability. Let si be the lowest offer of proposer
i that has positive probability . It cannot be the case that player i
puts strictly positive probability on offers si [ [si, sj) because the
probability that he wins with such an offer is zero. To see this, note
that in this case player i would get
(A4) Ui(si )5 2 a i
n2 1 s2 a i
n2 1 (12 s)5 2 a i
n2 1 .
On the other hand, if proposer i chooses si [ (maxjÞ i sj,0.5 ,1), then
there is a positive probability that he will win—in which case he
gets
(A5) 12 si2 a i
n2 1 (2si2 1)2 n2 2
n2 1 b i(12 si)
. (12 si )[12 n2 2
n2 1 b i ]2 a i
n2 1 . 2 a i
n2 1 .
Of course, there may also be a positive probability that proposer i
does not win, but in this case he again gets2 a i /(n2 1). Thus,
proposer i would deviate. It follows that it must be the case that
si 5 s for all i.
Suppose that proposer i changes his strategy and offers s 1 e , 1 in all states when his strategy would have required him to
858
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
choose s. The cost of this change is that whenever proposer i would
have won with the offer s he now receives only 12 s2 e . However ,
by making e arbitrarily small, this cost becomes arbitrarily small.
The benet is that there are now some states of the world which
have strictly positive probability in which proposer i does win with
the offer s 1 e but in which he would not have won with the offer s.
This benet is strictly positive and does not go to zero as e becomes
small. Hence, s , 1 cannot be part of an equilibrium outcome.
QED
Proof of Proposition 3
We rst show that s 5 1, which is accepted by all responders,
is indeed a subgame perfect equilibrium. Note that any offer s $ 0.5 will be accepted by all responders. The argument is exactly the
same as the one in the beginning of the proof of Proposition 1. The
following Lemma will be useful.
LEMMA 1. For any s , in which everybody accepts s.
0.5 there exists a continuation equilibrium
Given that all other players accept s player i prefers to accept as
well if and only if
(A6) s2 1
n2 1 a i(12 s2 s)2 n2 2
n2 1 b i(s2 0)
$ 02 1
n2 1 a i (12 s)2 1
n2 1 a is,
which is equivalent to
(A7) (12 b i)(n2 1) 1 2a i 1 b i $ 0.
Since we assume that b i , 1, this inequality must hold. h
Consider now the proposer . Clearly , it is never optimal to offer
s . 0.5. Such an offer is always dominated by s 5 0.5 which yields
a higher monetary payoff and less inequality . On the other hand,
we know by Lemma 1 that for any s # 0.5 there exists a
continuation equilibrium in which this offer is accepted by every-
body. Thus, we only have to look for the optimal s from the point of
view of the proposer given that s will be accepted. His payoff
function is
(A8) U1(s)5 12 s2 1
n2 1 b 1(12 s2 s)2 n2 2
n2 1 b 1(12 s).
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 859
Differentiating with respect to s yields
(A9)
dU1
ds5 2 1 1 2
n2 1 b 1 1 n2 2
n2 1 b 1,
which is independent of s and is smaller than 0 if and only if
(A10) b 1 # (n2 1)/n.
Hence, if this condition holds, it is an equilibrium that the
proposer offers s 5 0 which is accepted by all responders. We now
show that the highest offer that can be sustained in a subgame
perfect equilibrium is given by (8).
LEMMA 2. Suppose that s , 0.5 has been offered. There exists a
continuation equilibrium in which this offer is rejected by all
responders if and only if
(A11) s # a i
(12 b i)(n2 1) 1 2a i 1 b i ; i [ 2, . . . , n .
Given that all other responders reject s, responder i will reject s as
well if and only if
(A12) 0 $ s2 a i
n2 1 (12 2s)2 n2 2
n2 1 b is,
which is equivalent to (A11). Thus, (A11) is a sufficient condition
for a continuation equilibrium in which s is rejected by everybody .
Suppose now that (A11) is violated for at least one i [
2, . . . , n . We want to show that in this case there is no continua-
tion equilibrium in which s is rejected by everybody . Note rst that
in this case responder i prefers to accept s if all other responders
reject it. Suppose now that at least one other responder accepts s.
In this case responder i prefers to accept s as well if and only if
(A13)
s2 a i
n2 1 (12 2s)2 n2 2
n2 1 b is $ 02 a i
n2 1 (12 s)2 a i
n2 1
The right-hand side of this inequality is smaller than 0. We know
already that the left-hand side is greater than 0 since (A11) is
violated. Therefore, responder i prefers to accept s as well. We
conclude that if (A11) does not hold for at least one i, then at least
one responder will accept s. Hence, (A11) is also necessary . h
If b 1 , (n2 1)/n, an equilibrium offer must be sustained by
s.
860
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
the threat that any smaller offer s
˜ will be rejected by everybody .
But we know from Lemma 2 that an offer s
˜
may be rejected only if
(A11) holds for all i. Thus, the highest offer s that can be sustained
in equilibrium is given by (8).
QED
gj.
ers. Without loss of generality we relabel the players such that i5 1 and 0 # Proof of Proposition 4
(a) Suppose that 12 a . b i for player i. Consider an arbitrary
contribution vector ( g1, . . . , gi2 1, gi1 1, . . . , gn) of the other play-
g2 # g3 # ? ? ? # gn. If player 1 chooses g1 5 0, his payoff
is given by
n
(A14) U1 ( g1 5 0)5 y 1 a oj5 2
gj2 b
n
n2 1 oj5 2
Note rst that if all other players choose gj 5 0, too, then g1 5 0 is
clearly optimal. Furthermore, player 1 will never choose g1 . max gj. Suppose that there is at least one player who chooses gj . 0. If player 1 chooses g1 . 0, g1 [ [ gk, gk1 1], k [ 2, . . . , n , then his
payoff is given by
U1(g1 . 0)
n
5 y2 g1 1 ag1 1 a oj5 2
n
, y2 g1 1 ag1 1 a oj5 2
n
5 y2 g1 1 ag1 1 a oj5 2
1 b 1
n2 1 (n2 1)g1
n
5 y2 (12 a2 b 1)g1 1 a oj5 2
gj2 b 1
n
n2 1 oj5 2
n
, y 1 a oj5 2
gj2 b 1
n
n2 1 oj5 2
gj 5 U1(g1 5 0).
Hence, gi 5 0, is indeed a dominant strategy for player i.
gj2 b 1
n
k
n2 1 o j5 k1 1
(gj2 g1)2 a 1
n2 1 oj5 2
gj2 b 1
n
n2 1 o j5 k1 1
(gj2 g1) 1 b 1
k
n2 1 oj5 2
gj2 b 1
n
n2 1 oj5 2
(g12 gj)
(g12 gj)
gj
gj
n
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 861
(b) It is clearly an equilibrium if all players contribute
nothing because to unilaterally contribute more than zero reduces
the monetary payoff and causes disadvantageous inequality.
Suppose that there exists another equilibrium with positive
contribution levels. Relabel players such that 0 # g1 # g2 # ? ? ? # gn. By part (a) we know that all k players with 12 a . b i must
choose gi 5 0. Therefore, 05 g1 5 . . . gk. Consider player l . k who
has the smallest positive contribution level; i.e., 05 gl2 1 , gl # gl1 1 # ? ? ? # gn. Player 1’s utility is given by
n
(A15) Ul( gl)5 y2 gl 1 agl 1 a o j5 l1 1
gj2 b l
n
n2 1 o j5 l1 1
( gj2 gl)
l2 1
2 a l
n2 1 oj5 1
n
gl 5 y 1 a o j5 l1 1
gj2 b l
n2 1 o j5 l1 1
gj
n2 l
n2 1 gl2 a l
l2 1
n2 1 gl
5 Ul (0)2 (12 a) gl 1 b l
n2 l
n2 1 gl2 a l
l2 1
n2 1 gl,
where Ul (0) is the utility player 1 gets if he deviates and chooses
gl 5 0. Since a l $ b l, l $ k 1 1, and b l , 1, we have
(A16) Ul( gl) # Ul(0)2 (12 a) gl 1 b l
n2 l
n2 1 gl2 b l
l2 1
n2 1 gl
n2 2(k 1 1) 1 1
n2 1 gl
2 (12 a) gl 1 b l
# Ul (0)2 (12 a) gl 1 b l
, Ul (0)2 (12 a) gl 1 n2 2k2 1
n2 1 gl
5 Ul (0)2 (12 a)(n2 1)2 (n2 2k2 1)
n2 1 gl.
Thus if
(A17)
(12 a)(n2 1)2 (n2 2k2 1)
n2 1 $ 0,
player l prefers to deviate from the equilibrium candidate and to
862
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
choose gl 5 (A18) 0. But this inequality is equivalent to
(12 a)(n2 1) $ n2 2k2 1
Û a # 12 n2 2k2 1
n2 1
Û a # n2 12 n 1 2k 1 1
n2 15 2k
n2 1
Û k
n2 1 $ a
2 ,
which is the condition given in the proposition.
(c) Suppose that the conditions of the proposition are satis-
ed. We want to construct an equilibrium in which all k players
with 12 a . b i contribute nothing, while all other n2 k players
contribute g [ [0, y]. We only have to check that contributing g is
indeed optimal for the contributing players. Consider some player
j with 12 a , b j. If he contributes g, his payoff is given by
(A19) Uj( g)5 y2 g 1 (n2 k) ag2 [a j/(n2 1)] kg.
It clearly does not pay to contribute more than g. So suppose that
player j reduces his contribution level by D . 0. Then his payoff is
Uj( g2 D )5 y2 g 1 D 1 (n2 k) ag2 D a
2 a j
n2 1 k( g2 D )2 b j
n2 1 (n2 k2 1)D
5 y2 g2 (n2 k) ag2 a j
n2 1 kg
1 D 12 a 1 a j
n2 1 k2 b j
n2 1 (n2 k2 1)
5 Uj( g) 1 D 12 a 1 a j
n2 1 k2 b j
n2 1 (n2 k2 1) .
Thus, a deviation does not pay if and only if
12 a 1 a j
n2 1 k2 b j
n2 1 (n2 k2 1) # 0,
which is equivalent to
(A20) k/(n2 1) # (a 1 b j2 1)/(a j 1 b j).
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 863
Thus, if this condition holds for all (n2 k) players j with 12 (a 1 b j2 1)/(a j 1 b j) # a/2. Note that a j $ b j implies that
(a 1 b j2 1)/(a j 1 b j) # (a 1 b j2 1)/(2b j). Furthermore,
a 1 b j2 1
2b j # a
2 Û a 1 b j2 1 # b j a Û a(12 b j) # 12 b j Û a # 1,
which proves our claim.
a , b j, then this is indeed an equilibrium. It remains to be shown that
QED
( gi2 gi)
Proof of Proposition 5
Suppose that one of the players i [ n8 1 1, . . . , n chooses
gi , g. If all players stick to the punishment strategies in stage 2,
then deviator i gets the same monetary payoff as each enforcer j [
1, . . . , n8
. In this case monetary payoffs of i and j are given by
(A21) xi 5 y2 gi 1 a[(n2 1) g 1 gi]2 n8 g2 gi
n8 2 c
(A22) xj 5 y2 g 1 a[(n2 1) g 1 gi ]2 c
g2 gi
n8 2 c2 n8 2 c
n8 2 c
5 y2 gj 1 a[(n2 1) g 1 gi]2 (n8 2 c 1 c) g2 gi
n8 2 c 5 xi.
Thus, given the punishment strategy of the enforcers, devia-
tors cannot get a payoff higher than what the enforcers get.
However , they get a strictly lower payoff than the nonenforcers
who did not deviate. We now have to check that the punishment
strategies are credible; i.e., that an enforcer cannot gain from
reducing his pij. If an enforcer reduces pij by e , he saves ce and
experiences less disadvantageous inequality relative to those
(n2 n8 2 1) players who chose g but do not punish. This creates a
nonpecuniary utility gain of [a i(n2 n8 2 1) ce ]/(n2 1). On the
other hand, the enforcer also has nonpecuniary costs because he
experiences now disadvantageous inequality relative to the defec-
tor and a distributional advantage relative to the other (n8 2 1)
enforcers who punish fully. The latter generates a utility loss of
b i (n8 2 1) ce /(n2 1), whereas the former reduces utility by
a i(12 c)e /(n2 1). Thus, the loss from a reduction in pij is greater
864
than the gain if
(A23)
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
1
ce
n2 1 [a i(12 c)e 1 b i (n8 2 1) ce ] . ce 1 a i(n2 n8 2 1)
n2 1
holds. Some simple algebraic manipulations show that condition
(A23) is equivalent to condition (13). Hence, the punishment is
credible.
Consider now the incentives of one of the enforcers to deviate
in the rst stage. Suppose that he reduces his contribution by e . 0. Ignoring possible punishments in the second stage for a
moment, player i gains (12 a)e in monetary terms but incurs a
nonpecuniary loss of b 1e by creating inequality to all other
players. Since 12 a , b i by assumption, this deviation does not
pay. If his defection triggers punishments in the second stage,
then this reduces his monetary payoff which cannot make him
better off than he would have been if he had chosen gi 5 g. Hence,
the enforcers are not going to deviate at stage 1 either. It is easy to
see that choosing gi . g cannot be protable for any player either ,
since it reduces the monetary payoff and increases inequality.
QED
Computation of the Probability That There Are Conditionally
Cooperative Enforcers
T o compute the probability that, in a randomly drawn group
of four, there are subjects who obey condition (13) and a 1 b i $ 1,
we have to make an assumption about the correlation between a i
and b i. We mentioned already that the empirical evidence sug-
gests that these parameters are positively correlated. For concrete-
ness we assume that the correlation is perfect. Thus, in terms of
Table III all players with a 5 1 or a 5 4 are assumed to have b 5 0.6. This is clearly not fully realistic, but it simplies the analysis
dramatically.
In the Fehr-Ga ¨ chter [1996] experiment the relevant pa-
rameters are a 5 0.4, n 5 4, and (roughly33 )) c 5 0.2. The following
summary states the conditions on a i and b i implied by Proposition
5 for a group of n8 [ 1, . . . , 4 conditionally cooperative enforcers.
33. The cost function in Fehr and Ga ¨chter is actually convex, so that we have
to slightly simplify their model. Y et, the vast majority of actual punishments
occurred where c 5 0.2.
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 865
If one of these conditions holds, cooperation can be sustained in
equilibrium:
(i) n8 5 1, a i $ 1.5, and b i $ 0.6;
(ii) n8 5 2, a i $ 12 0.3b i, and b i $ 0.6;
(iii) n8 5 3, a i $ 0.752 0.5 b i, and b i $ 0.6;
(iv) n8 5 4, a i $ 0.62 0.6b i, and b i $ 0.6.
Note that for each group n8 of conditionally cooperative enforcers
the conditions on a i and b i have to hold simultaneously . Given the
discrete distribution of a and b of Table III, this can only be the
case if
c there is at least one player with a i 5 4 and b i 5 0.6, or
c there are at least two players with a i 5 1 and b i 5 0.6, or
c both.
Given the numbers of Table III, it is not difficult to show that the
probability that one of these cases applies is equal to 61.12
percent.
UNIVERSITY OF ZURICH
UNIVERSITY OF MUNICH
REFERENCES
Adams, J. Stacy ,
‘‘Toward an Understanding of Inequity ,’’ Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, LXVII (1963), 422–436.
Agell, Jonas, and Per Lundberg, ‘‘Theories of Pay and Unemployment: Survey
Evidence from Swedish Manufacturing Firms,’’ Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, XCVII (1995), 295–308.
Anderson, Simon P ., Jacob K. Goeree, and Charles H. Holt, ‘‘Stochastic Game
Theory—Adjustment to Equilibrium under Bounded Rationality ,’’ University
of Virginia, Working Paper No. 304, 1997.
Andreoni, James, ‘‘Why Free Ride?—Strategies and Learning in Public Goods
Experiments,’’ Journal of Public Economics, XXXXVII (1988), 291–304.
,
‘‘Cooperation in Public-Goods Experiments: Kindness or Confusion,’’ Ameri-
can Economic Review, LXXXV (1995a), 891–904.
,
‘‘Warm Glow versus Cold Prickle: The Effects of Positive and Negative
Framing on Cooperation in Experiments,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics,
CX (1995b), 1–21.
Andreoni, James, and John H. Miller, ‘‘Giving according to GARP: An Experimen-
tal Study of Rationality and Altruism,’’ SSRI Working Paper, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, 1996.
Babcock, Linda, Xianghong Wang, and George Loewenstein, ‘‘Choosing the Wrong
Pond: Social Comparisons in Negotiations That Reect a Self-Serving Bias,’’
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI (1996), 1–21.
Banerjee, Abhihit V .,
‘‘Envy ,’’ in: Dutta Bhaskar et al, eds., Economic Theory and
Policy, Essays in Honour of Dipak Banerjee (Oxford; Oxford University Press,
1990).
Berg, Joyce, John Dickhaut, and Kevin McCabe, ‘‘Trust, Reciprocity , and Social
History ,’’ Games and Economic Behavior , X (1995), 122–142.
Bewley , Truman, ‘‘A Depressed Labor Market as Explained by Participants,’’
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, LXXXV (1995), 250–
254.
,
‘‘Why not Cut Pay?’’ European Economic Review, XLII (1998), 459–490.
866
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Blinder, Alan S., and Don H. Choi, ‘‘A Shred of Evidence on Theories of Wage
Stickness,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, CV (1990), 1003–1016.
Blount, Sally ,
‘‘When Social Outcomes Aren’t Fair: The Effect of Causal Attribu-
tions on Preferences,’’ Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Proces-
ess, LXIII (1995), 131–144.
Bolle, Friedel, and Alexander Kritikos, ‘‘Self-Centered Inequality Aversion versus
Reciprocity and Altruism,’’ Discussion Paper, Europa-Universita ¨ t Viadrina,
Frankfurt (Oder), 1998.
Bolton, Gary E., and Axel Ockenfels, ‘‘A Theory of Equity , Reciprocity and
Competition,’’ Discussion Paper , Pennsylvania State University , 1997.
Bolton, Gary E., Jordi Brandts, and Elena Katok, ‘‘A Simple Test of Explanations
for Contributions in Dilemma Games,’’ Discussion Paper, Pennsylvania State
University , 1997.
Bolton, Gary E., Jordi Brandts, and Axel Ockenfels, ‘‘Measuring Motivations for
Reciprocal Responses Observed in Simple Dilemma Games,’’ Discussion
Paper, Universita ¨ t Magdeburg, 1997.
Burlando, Roberto, and John D. Hey ,
‘‘Do Anglo-Saxons Free-Ride More?’’ Journal
of Public Economics, LXIV (1997), 41–60.
Camerer , Colin, and Richard Thaler, ‘‘Ultimatums, Dictators, and Manners,’’
Journal of Economic Perspectives, IX (1995), 209–219.
Cameron, Lisa, ‘‘Raising the Stakes in the Ultimatum Game: Experimental
Evidence from Indonesia,’’ Discussion Paper, Princeton University , 1995.
Campbell, Carl M., and Kunal Kamlani, ‘‘The Reasons for Wage Rigidity: Evidence
from a Survey of Firms,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (1997),
759–789.
Charness, Gary ,
‘‘Attribution and Reciprocity in a Labor Market: An Experimental
Investigation,’ ’ Games and Economic Behavior , forthcoming.
Clark, Andrew E., and Andrew J. Oswald, ‘‘Satisfaction and Comparison Income,’’
Journal of Public Economics, LXI (1996), 359–381.
Croson, Rachel, T. A., ‘‘Expectations in Voluntary Contributions Mechanisms,’’
Discussion Paper , Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 1995.
,
‘‘Partners and Strangers Revisited,’’ Economics Letters, LIII (1996), 25–32.
Davis, Douglas, and Charles Holt, Experimental Economics (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press 1993).
Davis, J. A., ‘‘A Formal Interpretation of the Theory of Relative Deprivation,’’
Sociometry, XXII (1959), 280–296.
Dawes, Robyn M., and Richard Thaler ,
‘‘Cooperation,’’ Journal of Economic
Perspectives, II (1988), 187–197.
Dufwenberg, Martin, and Georg Kirchsteiger ,
‘‘A Theory of Sequential Reciproc-
ity,’’ Discussion Paper , CentER, Tilburg University , 1998.
Falk, Armin, and Urs Fischbacher ,
‘‘A Theory of Reciprocity ,’’ Discussion Paper,
University of Zu ¨ rich, 1998.
Falkinger , Josef, Ernst Fehr , Simon Ga ¨chter, and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer ,
‘‘A Simple
Mechanism for the Efficient Provision of Public Goods—Experimental Evi-
dence,’’ American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Fehr , Ernst and Armin Falk, ‘‘Wage Rigidity in a Competitive Incomplete Contract
Market,’’ Journal of Political Economy, CVII (1999), 106–134.
Fehr , Ernst, and Simon Ga ¨ chter,
‘‘Cooperation and Punishment—An Experimen-
tal Analysis of Norm Formation and Norm Enforcement,’’ Discussion Paper,
Institute for Empirical Research in Economics, University of Zu ¨ rich, 1996.
Fehr , Ernst, Simon Ga ¨ chter, and Georg Kirchsteiger ,
‘‘Reciprocity as a Contract
Enforcement Device,’’ Econometrica, LXV , No. 4, (1996), 833–860.
Fehr , Ernst, Georg Kirchsteiger, and Arno Riedl, ‘‘Does Fairness Prevent Market
Clearing? An Experimental Investigation,’ ’ Quarterly Journal of Economics,
CVIII (1993), 437–460.
Festinger , L., ‘‘A Theory of Social Comparison Processes,’’ Human Relations, VII
(1954), 117–140.
Forsythe, Robert, N. E. Horowitz, L. Hoel Savin, and Martin Sefton, ‘‘Fairness in
Simple Bargaining Games,’’ Games and Economic Behavior , VI (1988), 347–
369.
Franciosi, Robert, Praveen Kujal, Roland Michelitsch, Vernon Smith, and Gang
Deng, ‘‘Fairness: Effect on Temporary and Equilibrium Prices in Posted-Offer
Markets,’’ Economic Journal, CV (1995), 938–950.
A THEORY OF FAIRNESS, COMPETITION, AND COOPERATION 867
Frank, Robert H., Choosing the Right Pond—Human Behavior and the Quest for
Status (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985).
Friedman, Daniel, and John Rust, The Double Auction Market—Institutions,
Theories and Evidence (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company ,
1993).
Gu ¨ th, Werner , Nade ‘ ge Marchand, and Jean-Louis Rulliere, ‘‘On the Reliability of
Reciprocal Fairness—An Experimental Study ,’’ Discussion Paper , Humboldt
University Berlin, 1997.
Gu ¨ th, Werner, Rolf Schmittberger , and Bernd Schwarze, ‘‘An Experimental
Analysis of Ultimatum Bargaining,’’ Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, III (1982), 367–388.
Gu ¨ th, Werner , Rolf Schmittberger, and Reinhard Tietz, ‘‘Ultimatum Bargaining
Behavior—A Survey and Comparison of Experimental Results,’’ Journal of
Economic Psychology, XI (1990), 417–449.
Haltiwanger , John, and Michael Waldman, ‘‘Rational Expectations and the Limits
of Rationality ,’’ American Economic Review, LXXV (1985), 326–340.
Hayashi, Nahoko, Elinor Ostrom, James Walker, and Toshio Y amagishi, ‘‘Reciproc-
ity , Trust, and the Sense of Control: A Cross-Societal Study ,’’ Discussion Paper,
Indiana University , Bloomington, 1998.
Hoffman, Elizabeth, Kevin McCabe, and Vernon Smith, ‘‘On Expectations and
Monetary , Stakes in Ultimatum Games,’’ International Journal of Game
Theory, XXV (1996), 289–301.
Homans, G. C., Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms (New Y ork: Harcourt, Brace
& World, 1961).
Isaac, Mark R., and James M. Walker, ‘‘Group Size Effects in Public Goods
Provision: The Voluntary Contribution Mechanism,’’ Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CIII (1988), 179–199.
Isaac, Mark R., and James M. Walker ,
‘‘Costly Communication: An Experiment in
a Nested Public Goods Problem,’’ in Thomas R. Palfrey , ed., Laboratory
Research in Political Economy (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,
1991).
Isaac, Mark R., James M. Walker, and Arlington M. Williams, ‘‘Group Size and the
Voluntary Provision of Public Goods: Experimental Evidence Utilizing Large
Groups,’’ Journal of Public Economics, LIV (1994), 1–36.
Kachelmeier, Steven J., and Mohamed Shehata, ‘‘Culture and Competition: A
Laboratory Market Comparison between China and the West,’’ Journal of
Economic Organization and Behavior , XIX (1992), 145–168.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler ,
‘‘Fairness as a Con-
straint on Prot Seeking: Entitlements in the Market,’’ American Economic
Review, LXXVI (1986), 728–741.
Keser , Claudia, and Frans van Winden, ‘‘Partners Contribute More to Public
Goods than Strangers: Conditional Cooperation,’’ Discussion Paper, Univer-
sity of Karlsruhe, 1996.
Ledyard, John, ‘‘Public Goods: A Survey of Experimental Research,’’ in J. Kagel
and A. Roth, eds., Handbook of Experimental Economics (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1995).
Levine, David K., ‘‘Modeling Altruism and Spitefulness in Experiments,’’ Review of
Economic Dynamics, forthcoming (1997).
Loewenstein, George F ., Leigh Thompson, and Max H. Bazerman, ‘‘Social Utility
and Decision Making in Interpersonal Contexts,’’ Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, LVII (1989), 426–441.
McKelvey , Richard D., and Thomas R. Palfrey ,
‘‘Quantal Response Equilibria for
Normal Form Games,’’ Games and Economic Behavior , X (1995), 6–38.
Mueller, Denis, Public Choice II (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
Ockenfels, Axel, and Joachim Weimann, ‘‘Types and Patterns—An Experimental
East-West Comparison of Cooperation and Solidarity ,’’ Discussion Paper,
Department of Economics, University of Magdeburg, 1996.
Ostrom, Elinor, and James M. Walker, ‘‘Cooperation without External Enforce-
ment,’’ in Thomas R. Palfrey , ed., Laboratory Research in Political Economy
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1991).
Pollis, N. P .,
‘‘Reference Groups Re-examined,’’ British Journal of Sociology, XIX
(1968), 300–307.
868
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Rabin, Matthew ,
‘‘Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics,’’
American Economic Review, LXXXIII (1993), 1281–1302.
Rehder , Robert, ‘‘Japanese Transplants: After the Honeymoon,’ ’ Business Horizons
(1990), 87–98.
Roth, Alvin E., ‘‘Bargaining Experiments,’’ in J. Kagel and A. Roth, eds., Handbook
of Experimental Economics (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995).
Roth, Alvin, E., and Ido Erev ,
‘‘Learning in Extensive-Form Games: Experimental
Data and Simple Dynamic Models in the Intermediate Term,’’ Games and
Economic Behavior , VIII (1995), 164–212.
Roth, Alvin E., Vesna Prasnikar , Masahiro Okuno-Fujiwara, and Shmuel Zamir,
‘‘Bargaining and Market Behavior in Jerusalem, Ljubljana, Pittsburgh, and
Tokyo: An Experimental Study ,’’ American Economic Review, LXXXI (1991),
1068–1095.
Runciman, Walter G., Relative Deprivation and Social Justice (New Y ork: Penguin,
1966).
Russell, Thomas, and Richard Thaler ,
‘‘The Relevance of Quasi Rationality in
Competitive Markets,’’ American Economic Review, LXXV (1985), 1071–1082.
Sadrieh, Abdolkarim, The Alternating Double Auction Market (Berlin: Springer,
1998).
Skinner , Jonathan, and Joel Slemrod, ‘‘An Economic Perspective on Tax Evasion,’’
National Tax Journal, XXXVIII (1985), 345–353.
Slonim, Robert, and Alvin E. Roth, ‘‘Financial Incentives and Learning in
Ultimatum and Market Games: An Experiment in the Slovak Republic,’’
Econometrica, LXVI (1997), 569–596.
Smith, Vernon L., ‘‘An Experimental Study of Competitive Market Behavior,’’
Journal of Political Economy, LXX (1962), 111–137.
,
‘‘Microeconomic Systems as an Experimental Science,’’ American Economic
Review, LXXII (1982), 923–955.
Smith, Vernon L., and Arlington W . Williams, ‘‘The Boundaries of Competitive
Price Theory: Convergence Expectations and Transaction Costs,’’ in L. Green
and J. H. Kagel, eds., Advances in Behavioural Economics, Vol. 2 (Norwood,
NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation, 1990).
Stouffer , Samuel, A., The American Soldier (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1949).
Thaler , Richard H., ‘‘The Ultimatum Game,’’ Journal of Economic Perspectives, II
(1988), 195–206.
Tversky , A., and D. Kahneman, ‘‘Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference-
Dependent Model,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVI (1991), 1039–1062.
Watabe, M., S. Terai, N., Hayashi, and T. Y amagishi, ‘‘Cooperation in the One-Shot
Prisoner’s Dilemma Based on Expectations of Reciprocity ,’’ Japanese Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, XXXVI (1996), 183–196.
Whyte, William F ., Money and Motivation (New Y ork: Harper and Brothers, 1955).