PALGRAVE ADVANCES IN BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS
NUDGE THEORY 
IN ACTION
Behavioral Design in 
Policy and Markets
Edited by Sherzod Abdukadirov


---

 Palgrave Advances in Behavioral Economics  
 Series Editor 
 John   Tomer 
 Co-editor, Journal of Socio-Economics 
 Manhattan College 
 Riverdale 
 USA 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 This groundbreaking series is designed to make available in book form 
unique behavioral economic contributions. It provides a publishing 
opportunity for behavioral economist authors who have a novel perspec-
tive and have developed a special ability to integrate economics with other 
disciplines. It will allow these authors to fully develop their ideas. In gen-
eral, it is not a place for narrow technical contributions. Theoretical/con-
ceptual, empirical, and policy contributions are all welcome. 
More information about this series at 
 http://www.springer.com/series/14720 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Sherzod  Abdukadirov 
 Editor 
 Nudge Theory in 
Action 
 Behavioral Design in Policy and Markets  
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Palgrave Advances in Behavioral Economics 
 ISBN 978-3-319-31318-4    ISBN 978-3-319-31319-1 (eBook) 
 DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2016951439 
 © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s)  2016 
 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifi cally the rights of 
translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on 
microfi lms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, 
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now 
known or hereafter developed. 
 The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specifi c statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
 The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information 
in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the pub-
lisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the 
material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. 
 Cover illustration: © Zoonar GmbH / Alamy Stock Photo 
 Printed on acid-free paper 
 This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by Springer Nature 
 The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG Switzerland 
 Editor 
 Sherzod  Abdukadirov 
 Mercatus Center at George Mason University  
 Arlington ,  Virginia ,  USA 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

v
 The issues surrounding “Nudge” are some of the most important in all of 
economics. The simplest models of economics take preferences as given, 
but nudge ideas suggest that we can be moved, steered, and in some cases 
manipulated. Given these behavioral propensities, how do markets actu-
ally work? How does politics work? How  should politics work and what 
should policymakers do? How much can government take advantage of its 
nudging capability to bring about a better world? 
 Should we be more suspicious of private sector nudge or public sector 
nudge? 
 I am myself never quite sure how to answer the above question. On one 
hand, I fear the greater competency of private sector nudge. I know that a 
talented team of marketers is working overtime to try to get me to buy the 
product, take out a loan, or participate in a charitable cause. Furthermore, 
a competitive process winnows out the market players who are less good 
at nudging and elevates those who are better at nudging. 
 A lot of this nudging is good for me. If Spotify recommends some new 
music, there is a pretty good chance I’ll like it. If Whole Foods advertises a 
special, and puts it prominently on display, they fi gure I have the potential 
to become a regular buyer and enjoyer of the good. These nudges help 
me navigate the world. 
 In many other cases I am less sure, especially when the transaction is 
not likely to be repeated. I don’t trust doctors and dentists who try to 
intimidate me into scheduling more work and more procedures. I can’t 
trust the claims which most nonprofi ts make on behalf of their effective-
ness. And at times I wonder if higher education is really all it is cracked 
 FOREWORD 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

vi 
FOREWORD
up to be or rather simply something one must do to avoid not having a 
degree. Harvard does such a good job of making the lawn look nice when 
the parents visit for graduation. 
 Private sector nudge is highly problematic, and I would say it is often 
worst in those areas we tend to feel best about: health care, education, and 
charity. In those cases, our guard is most likely to be let down, even if we 
are highly educated. Or should I say  because we are educated? 
 What about public sector nudge? Well, the good news is that a lot 
of what government does is simply send money around through transfer 
programs. In this regard, its potential for manipulating us is fairly limited. 
Furthermore, government is extremely bureaucratic and usually it does 
not have top tier marketing talent. Most of the time I just don’t fi nd my 
government very persuasive. Is there really anything the DMV can talk me 
into that I wouldn’t otherwise want to do? 
 But can I then relax? Can I stop worrying about public sector nudge? 
 I am not so sure. 
 The biggest costs in human history come from wars, and very often 
the public sector—especially the executive branches in various countries—
nudges us into wars. I don’t hear enough discussion of this topic in the 
nudge literature. 
 Government also has nudged us into believing that more government 
regulation is the answer to many of our problems. This is a supposition 
created in part by government rhetoric, coming from Congress, the 
president, and of course, from the regulators themselves. Too often we 
see more regulation as the proper default, yet I believe that overall the 
American economy is too regulated in most areas. Government is partly 
to blame for that. Even if government agencies do not have the most 
effective marketers, they have information advantages which they use to 
promote a mentality of “let’s pass a law,” or “let’s pass a regulation,” as 
the best response to a lot of social problems. 
 Finally, I worry about how private sector and public sector nudge inter-
act. Nudges from the television news, and its coverage of crime stories, 
convince many Americans that rates of crime are rising when in fact they 
are falling. That’s a private sector nudge to be sure, and the private sec-
tor is doing the marketing, with great skill I might add. But how does it 
interact with the public sector? Well, prosecutors send more people to 
jail and for longer periods of time. Arguably we have ended up with too 
many people in jail, and there are then public sector unions which take 
a dim attitude to working too hard to close some jails. The problem, in 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

FOREWORD vii
 broadest terms, is that the public sector often piggybacks upon the mar-
keting efforts of the private sector. The private sector marketing, taken 
alone, probably would be far less harmful, but it can be combined with the 
coercive powers of the public sector. 
 On the brighter side, sometimes public sector nudge helps us. The 
campaign to cut back on the number of Americans smoking for instance 
has mostly been a big success, with big gains. 
 I fi nd these to be some of the most important and interesting issues 
today. The essays in this book are but one part of a broader movement 
to see just where the “Nudge” concept leaves us. I hope you will enjoy 
them, and I hope this preface gives you just the slightest nudge toward 
proceeding further. 
 Tyler   Cowen 
 Holbert L. Harris Chair of Economics at 
 George Mason University and 
General Director of the Mercatus Center at 
George Mason University, Arlington, VA, USA 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

ix
 I wish to personally thank the Mercatus Center at George Mason University 
for its generous support of the project. Specifi cally, I wish to thank James 
Broughel, program manager at the Mercatus Center, whose tireless efforts 
moved this project forward and ensured its fruition. I wish to thank Jamil 
Khan for providing administrative support, and Garrett Brown, director 
of publishing, for his help in navigating through the publishing process. 
Finally, I wish to thank Joe Kennedy and anonymous reviewers for their 
thoughtful comments. All errors are the sole responsibility of the authors. 
 Sherzod Abdukadirov 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

xi
 About the Contributors 
    xiii 
 Introduction: Regulation versus Technology as Tools of 
Behavior Change 
    1 
 Sherzod  Abdukadirov 
 Part I Theory 
   13 
 Overview of Behavioral Economics and Policy 
   15 
 Mark  D.  White 
 The Four Pillars of Behavioral Paternalism 
   37 
 Mario  J.  Rizzo 
 Failing Better: What We Learn by Confronting Risk 
and Uncertainty 
   65 
 Adam  Thierer 
 Behavioral Nudges and Consumer Technology 
   95 
 Steve  Wendel 
 CONTENTS 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

xii 
CONTENTS
 Private-Sector Nudging: The Good, the Bad, and the 
Uncertain 
  125 
 Jodi  N.  Beggs 
 Who Should Nudge? 
  159 
 Sherzod  Abdukadirov 
 Part II Case Studies 
  193 
 Weight-Loss Nudges: Market Test or Government Guess? 
  195 
 Michael  Marlow 
 Nudging in an Evolving Marketplace: How Markets 
Improve Their Own Choice Architecture 
  225 
  Adam  C.  Smith and  Todd  J.  Zywicki 
 One Standard to Rule Them All: The Disparate Impact 
of Energy Effi ciency Regulations 
  251 
 Sofi e  E.  Miller and  Brian  F.  Mannix 
 Nudges in Health Care 
  289 
 Robert  Graboyes and  Jessica  Carges 
 Conclusion: Behavioral Economics and Policy Interventions 
  317 
 Richard  Williams 
 Index 
  331 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

xiii
 ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS 
 Sherzod Abdukadirov is a research fellow in the Regulatory Studies 
Program at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. He special-
izes in the federal regulatory process, behavioral economics, and health 
policy. Abdukadirov has prepared numerous policy briefs on regulatory 
issues, has written for USA Today, and US News & World Report, and is a 
contributing author for The Hill. He published in Constitutional Political 
Economy, William and Mary Policy Review and Regulation. Abdukadirov 
received his PhD in public policy from George Mason University and his 
BS in information technology from Rochester Institute of Technology.
Jodi N. Beggs is a lecturer at Northeastern University, where she teaches 
behavioral economics to undergraduate and graduate students. In addi-
tion, Beggs is the economics expert for About.com and a consultant 
to a number of technology companies and textbook publishers. Via her 
own company, Economists Do It With Models, Beggs provides online 
educational content in various formats to both help students directly 
and help instructors present economics in a way that is timely, relevant, 
and fun.  Beggs has an AM in Economics from Harvard University as 
well as graduate and undergraduate degrees  in Computer Science and 
Mathematics from the Massachusetts Institute of Tech nology.
Jessica Carges is a masters student in the Department of Economics 
at George Mason University. She is currently a second-year MA Fellow 
with the Mercatus Center, where she works as a graduate research assis-
tant focused on health policy. She has interned with Health and Human 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

xiv 
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS
Services, HHR Strategies, and the U.S. Trade Representative Offi ce. 
Carges graduated from George Mason University with a BS in economics 
in 2015. 
Tyler Cowen is Holbert L. Harris Chair of Economics at George Mason 
University and serves as chairman and general director of the Mercatus 
Center at George Mason University. With colleague Alex Tabarrok, 
Cowen is coauthor of the popular economics blog Marginal Revolution 
and cofounder of the online educational platform Marginal Revolution 
University.
A dedicated writer and communicator of economic ideas who has writ-
ten extensively on the economics of culture, Cowen is the author of sev-
eral books and is widely published in academic journals and the popular 
media. He writes the Economic Scene column for the New York Times; 
has contributed extensively to national publications such as the Wall Street 
Journal and Money; and serves on the on the advisory boards of both 
Wilson Quarterly and American Interest. His research has been published 
in the American Economic Review, the Journal of Political Economy, Ethics, 
and Philosophy and Public Affairs.
In 2011, Bloomberg Businessweek profi led Cowen as “America’s Hottest 
Economist” after his e-book, The Great Stagnation, appeared twice on the 
New York Times e-book bestseller list. Columnist David Brooks declared it 
“the most debated nonfi ction book so far this year.” Foreign Policy named 
Cowen as one of 2011’s “Top 100 Global Thinkers,” and an Economist 
survey counted him as one of the most infl uential economists of the last 
decade. Cowen graduated from George Mason University with a BS in 
economics and received his PhD in economics from Harvard University.
Robert Graboyes is senior research fellow and health care economist at 
the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. Author of “Fortress 
and Frontier in American Health Care,” his work asks, “How can we 
make health care as innovative in the next 25 years as information tech-
nology was in the past 25?” Previously, he was health care advisor for 
the National Federation of Independent Business, economics professor 
at the University of Richmond, regional economist/director of educa-
tion at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and Sub-Saharan Africa 
economist for Chase Manhattan Bank. His work has taken him to Europe, 
Africa, and Central Asia. An award-winning teacher, he holds faculty 
appointments at Virginia Commonwealth University and the University 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS xv
of Virginia. Previously he taught at George Mason University and the 
George Washington University.
His degrees include a PhD in Economics from Columbia University; 
master’s from Columbia University, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
and the College of William and Mary; and a bachelor’s from the University 
of Virginia. He chaired the National Economists Club, Richmond 
Association for Business Economics, and National Association for Business 
Economics Healthcare Roundtable. He won the Reason Foundation’s 
2014 Bastiat Prize for Journalism, an international competition for “writ-
ing that best demonstrates the importance of individual liberty and free 
markets with originality, wit, and eloquence.”
Brian F.  Mannix is a research professor at the George Washington 
University Regulatory Studies Center. He is a recognized national 
expert on energy and environmental policy and regulation. From 2005 
to 2009 he served as the Environmental Protection Agency’s Associate 
Administrator for Policy, Economics, and Innovation; earlier he served as 
Deputy Secretary of Natural Resources for the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
He has held appointments at a number of other federal and state agencies, 
and has held research positions at several public policy think tanks. From 
1987 to 1989 Mannix was the Managing Editor of Regulation magazine 
at the American Enterprise Institute. He earned AB and AM degrees from 
Harvard University in Mathematics and Chemistry and an MPP from the 
Harvard Kennedy School of Government.
Michael Marlow is a professor of economics and distinguished scholar 
at California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo. His research 
examines numerous issues associated with spending, taxation and regula-
tory policies of government. His most recent research focuses on public 
health economics. Prior to coming to Cal Poly in 1988, he was a senior 
fi nancial economist at the U.S. Treasury and taught at George Washington 
University. He is a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of George Washington 
University where he was awarded a BA in Economics. He received his 
PhD in economics from Virginia Tech.
Sofi e E. Miller is a senior policy analyst at the George Washington 
University Regulatory Studies Center. Her research portfolio includes use 
of benefi t-cost analysis by agencies, retrospective review of existing rules, 
economic analysis of energy effi ciency standards, quantitative analysis of 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

xvi 
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS
regulatory benefi ts, and the regressive effects of regulation. Miller has 
drawn on this research to submit over twenty public comments to fed-
eral agencies on proposed rules spanning the topics of energy and envi-
ronment, consumer safety, transportation, reducing regulatory burdens, 
and enhancing competition through regulatory policy.  Miller has pub-
lished articles in academic journals of public policy and administrative 
law and her work has also appeared in the Washington Post, Bloomberg 
BNA, Morning Consult, Reuters, the Chicago Tribune, and The Hill. 
Miller serves as Editor in Chief of the Regulatory Studies Center’s weekly 
Regulation Digest, which reaches over 1,300 subscribers with weekly 
updates on regulatory developments in agencies, think tanks, the media, 
and academia. Miller has a master’s degree in public policy with a concen-
tration in regulatory policy from the George Washington University.
Mario J. Rizzo is a professor of economics at New York University, direc-
tor of the Program on the Foundations of the Market Economy, and co-
director of the Classical Liberal Institute at the NYU Law School. He 
received his PhD. in economics from the University of Chicago. He was 
a law and economics fellow at Yale Law School and the University of 
Chicago Law School. He teaches a yearly seminar at the NYU Law School 
called “Classical Liberalism.”
Professor Rizzo’s major fi elds of research has been law and econom-
ics, ethics and economics, and most recently behavioral economics and 
paternalism. He is the author of Austrian Economics Re-examined: The 
Economics of Time and Ignorance published in 2015 by Routledge. This 
is an expanded version of The Economics of Time and Ignorance. He is the 
author of many law-review and other scholarly articles. He is also the co-
editor with Lawrence White of a Routledge book series called Foundations 
of the Markets Economy. There are now 33 books in this series. He is 
currently fi nishing a book for Cambridge University Press on rationality, 
behavioral economics and new paternalism.
Adam C. Smith is an associate professor of economics and director of the 
Center for Free Market Studies at Johnson & Wales University. He has 
published peer-reviewed articles in the Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization, the European Journal of Political Economy, Social Choice & 
Welfare, and Public Choice, as well as popular pieces in Forbes, US News 
& World Report, Charlotte Business Journal, and Regulation magazine. 
He is also a visiting scholar with the Regulatory Studies Center at George 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS xvii
Washington University, and co-author with Bruce Yandle of Bootleggers 
and Baptists: How Economic Forces and Moral Persuasion Interact to Shape 
Regulatory Politics (Cato Press, 2014).
Adam Thierer is a senior research fellow with the Technology Policy 
Program at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. He spe-
cializes in technology, media, Internet, and free-speech policies, with a 
particular focus on online safety and digital privacy. His writings have 
appeared in the Wall Street Journal, the Economist, the Washington Post, 
the Atlantic, and Forbes, and he has appeared on national television and 
radio. Thierer is a frequent guest lecturer and has testifi ed numerous times 
on Capitol Hill.
Thierer has authored or edited eight books on topics ranging from 
media regulation and child safety issues to the role of federalism in high-
technology markets. His latest book is Permissionless Innovation: The 
Continuing Case for Comprehensive Technological Freedom. He contributes 
to the Technology Liberation Front, a leading tech policy blog. Thierer 
has served on several distinguished online safety task forces, including 
Harvard University’s Internet Safety Technical Task Force and the fed-
eral government’s Online Safety Technology Working Group. Previously, 
Thierer was president of the Progress & Freedom Foundation, director of 
telecommunications studies at the Cato Institute, and a senior fellow at 
the Heritage Foundation. Thierer received his MA in international busi-
ness management and trade theory at the University of Maryland and his 
BA in journalism and political philosophy from Indiana University.
Steve Wendel is a behavioral social scientist who studies fi nancial behav-
ior, and how digital products can help individuals manage their money 
more effectively. He serves as Head of Behavioral Science at Morningstar, 
a leading provider of independent investment research, where he leads a 
team of behavioral scientists and practitioners to conduct original research 
on saving and investing behavior. 
Wendel is the author of Designing for Behavior Change (November 
2013) and Improving Employee Benefi ts (September 2014). The fi rst book 
gives step-by-step instructions on how to develop products that help users 
take action: from exercising more to learning a new language. His second 
book examines why employees fail to use their benefi ts and how behav-
ioral economics can help. Wendel also founded the non-profi t Action 
Design Network, which hosts an annual conference and monthly events 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

xviii 
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS
in seven cities for over 5,000 practitioners applying behavioral research to 
product development and communications. Wendel holds a BA from the 
University of California at Berkeley, an MA from the Paul H. Nitze School 
of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University, and a 
PhD from the University of Maryland, where he analyzed the dynamics of 
behavioral change over time.
Mark D. White is chair and professor in the Department of Philosophy 
at the College of Staten Island/CUNY, where he teaches courses in phi-
losophy, economics, and law. He has published widely in the intersections 
of these areas, including fi ve authored books, over 50 journal articles and 
book chapters, and many edited and co-edited volumes. 
Richard Williams is director of the Regulatory Studies Program, and a 
senior research fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. 
He is an expert in benefi t-cost analysis and risk analysis, particularly associ-
ated with food safety and nutrition. Williams has testifi ed before the US 
Congress and addressed numerous international governments, including 
those of the United Kingdom, South Korea, Yugoslavia, and Australia. 
His media appearances have included NPR, Reuters, Bloomberg, the New 
York Times and the Wall Street Journal.
Before joining the Mercatus Center, Williams was the director for social 
sciences at the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition in the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA). He also was an adviser to the Harvard 
Center for Risk Analysis and taught economics at Washington and Lee 
University. He is a US Army veteran who served in Vietnam. Williams 
received his PhD and MA in economics from Virginia Tech and his BS in 
business administration from Old Dominion University.
Todd J. Zywicki is Foundation Professor of Law at George Mason 
University School of Law, Executive Director of the Law and Economics 
Center, and a senior scholar of the Mercatus Center at George Mason 
University. He specializes in bankruptcy, contracts, commercial law, busi-
ness associations, law and economics, and public choice and the law. 
Zywicki has testifi ed before Congress on consumer bankruptcy and con-
sumer credit, and he frequently commentates in print and broadcast media, 
including the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times, the Washington 
Post, Forbes, the Atlantic, Nightline, NBC Nightly News, PBS Newshour, 
Fox Business, CNN, CNBC, Bloomberg News, BBC, ABC Radio, and 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS xix
The Diane Rehm Show. He writes for the legal blog the Volokh Conspiracy 
and is an editor of the Supreme Court Economic Review. 
Previously, Zywicki was director of the Offi ce of Policy Planning at 
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and taught at Vanderbilt University 
Law School, Georgetown University Law Center, Boston College Law 
School, and Mississippi College School of Law. Zywicki received his JD 
from the University of Virginia, his MA in economics from Clemson 
University, and his BA in economics from Dartmouth College. 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

1
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_1
 Introduction: Regulation versus Technology 
as Tools of Behavior Change 
 Sherzod   Abdukadirov 
 For a long time in human history, the world was relatively simple. Our 
hunter-gatherer ancestors faced few choices. 1 They hunted when they ran 
out of game and ate whatever they could hunt or gather—watching their 
diet or exercising was hardly a concern. They ate their kill within days to 
avoid the meat getting spoiled; they could not save any of it for future con-
sumption. They did not plan out their future careers. They did not save 
for old age. In the extraordinarily violent world of hunter-gatherers, few 
individuals lived past their prime years. Surprisingly, they enjoyed quite a 
bit of leisure time. While life was no picnic, it put few cognitive demands 
on hunter-gatherers’ brains. 
 Modern life could not be more different. We are bombarded with 
choices in our daily lives: a cornucopia of cereal brands and fl avors; dozens 
of investment funds with varying degrees of risk; and a seemingly end-
less selection of TV shows, apps, books, clothing, and so on. 2 We have 
to make complex decisions that require considerable mental capacity but 
also patience to weed through all the details; just take mortgages, credit 
card agreements, or college fi nancial aid applications. We have to plan 
for events that are years and even decades in the future, like saving for 
 S.  Abdukadirov () 
 Mercatus Center at  George Mason University ,  Arlington ,  VA ,  USA 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 children’s college tuition or our own retirement. Most importantly, every 
day we have to exert substantial willpower to stick with those decisions in 
the face of all the other enticing choices. 
 Yet, despite the ever-multiplying demands on our cognitive abilities 
and self-control, our brain’s capacity to handle these requests remains 
quite limited. Behavioral economists Sendhil Mullainathan and Eldar 
Shafi r compare our brain capacity to a computer’s bandwidth. 3 Each new 
task that requires individuals to process more data or exert self-control 
depletes the brain’s capacity. For example, studies show that students are 
more likely to cheat on tests given later in the day as their capacity for 
self-control—the ability to resist temptation—gets depleted through the 
course of the day. 4 Similarly, subjects preoccupied with money or their 
diets perform worse on cognitive tests. 5 
 This scarcity of cognitive capacity and self-control often leads con-
sumers to make biased decisions. 6 Consumers fail to make the rational 
choice, meaning they fail to select the option that is clearly more cost 
benefi cial and would improve their welfare. For example, many over-
weight and obese individuals understand the harms of extra weight to 
their health and want to lose weight, but they fi nd it extremely diffi -
cult to resist the immediate gratifi cation of a tasty but unhealthy snack 
in favor of long-term health. Many employees procrastinate and fail to 
set up contributions to their 401(k) plans, despite the obvious need to 
save for retirement. Many patients with chronic health conditions for-
get to take their pills or do not comprehend the need to complete the 
full course of medication to prevent future hospitalization and expensive 
treatment. 
 Scholars refer to these biased decisions as behavioral failures, and the 
impact of these decisions can be substantial. 7 For example, some estimates 
show that more than half of Americans are not saving enough for retire-
ment. 8 Over two-thirds of Americans are either overweight or obese, 9 
which may lead to a host of major health problems. 10 Failure of chronic 
patients to adhere to medication leads to an estimated $100–300 billion 
in additional medical expenditures each year. 11 
 Note that when discussing behavioral failures in the context of policy, 
we are not talking about deviations from the caricature  perfect rationality 
that expects consumers to purchase the most cost-benefi cial cup of coffee. 
Rather we are talking about  reasonable rationality that many of us exhibit 
by graduating from college, staying on track with retirement plans, or 
watching what we eat. What elevates some behavioral failures to the level 
2 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

of public policy concern is that the harms caused by these behavioral biases 
can be severe and often irreversible. 
 Faced with these concerns, policymakers have increasingly sought to 
counter behavioral biases through regulations. For example, in 2015, 
President Obama issued an executive order that encouraged federal agen-
cies to employ behavioral insights to design more effective government 
policies and programs. 12 The order directed all agencies to develop strate-
gies for greater use of behavioral sciences. It further directed the recently 
created Social and Behavioral Sciences Team to issue guidance to help 
agencies implement the order. These efforts follow in the footsteps of the 
Behavioral Insights Team—better known as the Nudge Unit—established 
within the UK government. 13 
 In most cases, these regulatory remedies take the form of paternalis-
tic policies. These nudges aim to correct consumer errors by either lim-
iting consumer choices or replacing consumer decisions with those of 
policymakers. For example, fuel effi ciency standards force consumers to 
purchase more effi cient vehicles in an effort to save consumers money 
through lower fuel costs. Financial regulations attempt to discourage con-
sumers from using overdraft protection and incurring substantial fees for 
the service; they instead aim to get consumers to use cheaper alternatives. 
Sugary drink taxes try to encourage consumers to switch to less caloric and 
more nutritious drink alternatives. 
 What often escapes the notice of policymakers and academics that 
advise them is the crucial role that markets play in generating products and 
services that would help consumers overcome their biases. When market 
efforts do come up in the discussion, advocates of policy nudges either dis-
miss markets as insuffi cient to solve problems or assume they will exploit 
consumers’ weaknesses rather than correct them. 14 
 In this volume, we attempt to remedy this shortcoming of the nudge 
literature by comparing and contrasting the two primary tools for behav-
ior change: regulations and technology. As the chapters in this volume 
discuss, there is a wide array of products on the market that aim to help 
consumers make better decisions and improve their lives. Financial advi-
sors and personal fi nance apps help consumers stay on track with their 
fi nances. Numerous diets and recently popular wearable technology tools 
help consumers reduce the negative impacts of excess weight. Similar to 
policy nudges, these tools increasingly incorporate behavioral insights 
to become more effective in helping consumers overcome their biased 
decision-making. 
INTRODUCTION 3
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Given the competing role played by government regulations and private 
behavioral technologies in their attempts to help consumers make better 
choices, the two approaches warrant a closer examination. Regulators and 
private fi rms designing nudges face similar problems. They often lack the 
information they need to measure the underlying consumer bias and to 
design effective mechanisms to counter it. They also face thorny ethical 
issues when it comes to their ability to manipulate consumer behavior. 
Yet, regulators and private fi rms address these issues differently, which has 
signifi cant impact on the effectiveness of each approach. 
 Part one of the book reviews each method and considers the ethical 
challenges that arise with both government and market nudges. In the 
opening chapter, Mark White provides a brief overview of behavioral eco-
nomics and its use in public policy. White further summarizes the greatest 
challenges to the government’s pursuit of policy ends through nudges, 
which he groups into epistemic, ethical, and practical categories. The main 
epistemic challenge stems from the policymakers’ inability to determine 
whether a consumer’s choice refl ects true preference or biased decision- 
making. The main ethical challenge derives from the fact that by imposing 
a choice on consumers, nudges threaten their autonomy. On a practical 
level, White questions whether nudges can actually deliver the outcomes 
they promise. 
 Following the theme of epistemic challenges, Mario Rizzo’s chapter 
outlines four necessary conditions for policymakers to be able to craft 
effective nudges. First, the policymakers have to know exactly what consti-
tutes a rational choice for consumers under given circumstances. Second, 
they have to empirically demonstrate that consumers systematically deviate 
from the rational choice. Third, they need to be able to devise effective 
policies to counter consumers’ biases. Fourth, these policies should not 
impose excessively high costs on consumers’ welfare or freedom. Yet as 
Rizzo demonstrates, at each point, policymakers face substantial, if not 
insurmountable, epistemic challenges to satisfying these conditions. 
 Adam Thierer’s chapter highlights uncertainty of a different kind—
the long-term impact of nudge policy. In a cross-disciplinary overview, 
Thierer notes the crucial role that failure and learning play in advancing 
human progress. He expresses concern that a nudge policy framework 
that aims to eliminate all individual failure may have the unintended con-
sequence of depriving individuals of critical life lessons and the ability to 
build up resilience in response to adverse circumstances. Thierer acknowl-
edges that some failures may be catastrophic and genuinely warrant policy 
4 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 intervention. However, he points out the current academic literature fails 
to clearly delineate the cases that would justify policy intervention. 
 In contrast to preceding chapters, Steve Wendel turns attention to the 
private sector’s use of behavioral technologies to help consumers change 
their behavior. He gives a brief overview of the private nudge industry that 
frequently aims to help consumers correct the same individual failures as 
public policy. Wendel outlines several challenges that face the private sec-
tor for nudges. First, high-quality behavioral research is uncommon and 
many studies are incomplete or contradictory. Second, the secrecy that 
typically surrounds product development in the private sector can hamper 
knowledge sharing among nudge practitioners. Third, the high level of 
sensitivity of nudges to specifi c context, implementation, and population 
characteristics often makes it diffi cult to apply behavioral research fi ndings 
in a different context. 
 Going beyond the epistemic issues, Jody Beggs addresses the potential 
ethical challenges that may arise when private fi rms seek to change con-
sumer behavior. Since private fi rms pursue profi ts rather than consumer 
welfare, their attempts to change consumer behavior may not necessarily 
benefi t consumers. Beggs identifi es two types of nudges. In the fi rst cat-
egory, which she calls Pareto nudges, the interests of consumers and com-
panies align, and therefore, private nudges typically help consumers. In 
the second category are rent-seeking nudges in which companies benefi t 
by exploiting consumers’ biases. These nudges may help the company’s 
bottom line but generally harm consumers. Yet, whether a nudge falls 
under one or the other category is not always clear. Given heterogene-
ity of consumer preferences and biases, the same nudge could help some 
consumers but harm others. 
 Finally, Sherzod Abdukadirov compares the private and public sectors 
in their ability to deal with epistemic challenges in order to produce effec-
tive nudges. Given the embryonic state of behavioral research and uncer-
tainty that exists with regard to most behavioral intervention mechanisms, 
nudge designers have to rely on a trial-and-error process to weed out bad 
ideas and refi ne the promising nudges. While most private fi rms set up 
fl exible innovation processes that allow for experimentation, the rigid 
regulatory process that governments have to follow makes the necessary 
experimentation extremely diffi cult. Consequently, regulatory nudges are 
more likely to fail. 
 Part two of the book includes four case studies that examine the 
effectiveness of government and market nudges in specifi c policy areas. 
INTRODUCTION 5
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Michael Marlow discusses the use of nudges to counter the growing obe-
sity epidemic. Given the many diffi culties facing government and market 
nudge designers, Marlow fi nds that nudges are a rather blunt instrument 
to encourage consumers to lose weight. Yet comparing the two, Marlow 
tentatively concludes that market nudging efforts may provide a more 
promising avenue for helping consumers make better dietary choices. 
 In a chapter devoted to nudges in the consumer fi nance sector, Adam 
Smith and Todd Zywicki question the quality of evidence for some com-
mon consumer biases that provoked regulatory responses. Echoing 
Thierer’s concerns, Smith and Zywicki argue that markets are the product 
of an unguided evolutionary process, and consumer choices, even if not 
strictly rational, may represent adaptive behavior in response to circum-
stances. The authors refer to this as ecological rationality. They further 
point to a great deal of incentives for private fi rms to provide consumers 
with tools for better fi nancial decision-making, leading them to question 
the rationale for regulatory interventions. 
 In their chapter, Sofi e Miller and Brian Mannix examine the case for 
perhaps the most extensive government nudge policy—energy and fuel 
effi ciency standards. Federal agencies imposing the standards justify them 
on the grounds that the standards correct present biased consumer behav-
ior and ultimately save consumers money in future energy costs. In their 
critique, Miller and Mannix point out that a single standard cannot effec-
tively serve the goals of consumers with varying preferences and discount 
rates. They note that the negative impacts of energy effi ciency standards 
may fall disproportionately on the low-income consumers. 
 In the fi nal case study, Robert Graboyes and Jessica Carges examine 
the impact of behavioral insights in healthcare. The authors point out that 
the fi eld of healthcare is unique since the insights of behavioral economics 
merge with the two existing dominant streams of thought in healthcare: 
medical paternalism and progressivism. Medical paternalism refers to the 
longstanding tradition within the medical profession to discount patients’ 
wishes and decision-making capacity, while progressivism refers to the bias 
toward government as opposed to market solutions in healthcare. The 
result is a highly precautionary environment where policymakers do not 
simply ignore market efforts to improve healthcare but actively restrict 
and forestall some of these solutions. 
 In the concluding chapter, Richard Williams makes the following obser-
vations with regard to the unbridled enthusiasm displayed by some gov-
ernment nudge advocates. Not all behavioral failures require government 
6 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

intervention; failure is frequently a useful learning mechanism that helps 
consumers make better decisions in the future. Heterogeneity among con-
sumers makes it diffi cult to design nudges that would help broad segments 
of society. And the unintended consequences that frequently accompany 
most policies increase the potential cost of centralized intervention. In 
contrast, private fi rms designing nudges, while facing their own set of 
challenges, may be able to produce more effective and targeted nudges at 
a considerably lower cost than regulators. 
 A NOTE ON TERMINOLOGY 
 Given considerable disagreements over the role that behavioral economics 
ought to play in public policy, it is useful to defi ne some of the common 
terms. In this book, discussions of paternalism refer specifi cally to new 
paternalism. New paternalism describes cases where governments enact 
policies that attempt to help individuals achieve goals that they set for 
themselves. 15 It is different from traditional paternalism in that the new 
paternalists do not attempt to impose their own views and agendas on 
individuals. Although, as later chapters explain, the distinction between 
the two often get blurred, since even with new paternalist policies it is typ-
ically the regulators who decide what goals are in consumers’ best interest. 
 Antiobesity policies are a typical example of new paternalism. Most 
overweight and obese individuals want to lose weight and keep it off, but 
they fi nd it extremely diffi cult to stick with the diet and exercise regimen 
given all the temptations that surround them. Policies like soda taxes or 
calorie disclosures attempt to help people who want to lose weight choose 
a better diet and achieve the long-term weight goals they set for them-
selves. In contrast, the ban on alcohol sales imposed during Prohibition is 
an example of traditional paternalism. In this case, paternalists imposed a 
policy that they thought was best for the American people, even if many 
Americans disagreed. 
 Some scholars make a further distinction between soft and hard pater-
nalism. For example, behavioral economists, Richard Thaler and Cass 
Sunstein, popularized the term  nudge in their infl uential book with the 
same title to refer to behaviorally informed government policies. 16 In that 
book and other works, the authors advocated for what they call libertarian 
paternalism. 17 The key feature of soft or libertarian paternalism is the abil-
ity of consumers to opt out of the paternalistic policy. In contrast to hard 
paternalism, which relies on coercion to push consumers toward  better 
INTRODUCTION 7
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

choices, soft paternalism exploits behavioral quirks to steer consumers 
in the right direction. For example, policymakers can exploit the natural 
human tendency to procrastinate to nudge them toward a given choice 
by setting it as a default. While consumers can easily opt out of the nudge 
and make a different choice, pervasive behavioral biases ensure that few 
consumers do. 
 In practice, the distinction is often blurred. Both soft and hard pater-
nalism rely on a similar mechanism: they make bad choices more costly 
compared to good choices. The main difference is that in the case of soft 
paternalism, the costs attached to bad choices are considerably lower 
than in the case of hard paternalism. For example, opting out of a default 
choice requires consumers to exert mental effort—a relatively minor cost. 
In contrast, opting out of the mandatory energy effi ciency standard would 
be very costly. 
 Yet, in some cases, the line between soft and hard paternalism is not 
clear. Consider the example of New  York City’s failed attempt to ban 
large-sized sodas. 18 The policy would prevent consumers from purchasing 
soda in 64 ounce containers. But consumer could still purchase two 32 
ounce sodas to circumvent the ban. Whether the cost of opting out—the 
slightly higher price and added inconvenience—would qualify the policy 
as soft or hard paternalism is unclear. While some of the measure’s propo-
nents viewed it as a nudge, 19 Thaler emphatically disagreed. 20 
 More to the point, many paternalist policies inspired by Thaler and 
Sunstein’s infl uential book take both a soft and a hard paternalistic 
approach. As chapters in this volume discuss, energy standards often coex-
ist with energy labeling requirements and sugar taxes go hand in hand 
with calorie disclosure requirements. To cover the full range of policies 
attempting to deal with consumer biases, this book will discuss both soft 
and hard paternalistic policies and refer to all behaviorally informed regu-
lations as nudges. 
 Finally, the discussion of behavioral economics in policy often con-
fl ates the concepts of new paternalism and behavioral design. 21 Both use 
behavioral insights into the psychology of human decision-making but 
they employ these insights for different purposes. Behavioral design does 
not seek to achieve a particular goal. Its aim is to make consumer products 
or government policies more effi cient by designing them with consumer 
behavior in mind. It does so by removing friction from the process and 
making it as effortless as possible. 
8 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 For example, in the UK, Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs depart-
ment partnered with the Behavioral Insights Team to develop mechanisms 
to improve tax debt collection. 22 In one fi eld experiment, they sent let-
ters to taxpayers informing them that most people in their neighborhood 
have already paid their taxes. Thus, the department exploited the power of 
social norms to improve tax return compliance. The program did not seek 
to improve consumer welfare, be that from the point of view of consumer 
or regulators, but rather to improve the effectiveness of a government 
program. While this is certainly an important area for discussion, this book 
will focus mainly on the use of behavioral economics toward paternalist 
goals. 
 NOTES 
  1. Marshall David Sahlins,  Stone Age Economics (New York: Aldine de 
Gruyter, 1974); Richard Barry Lee, “What Hunters Do for a Living, 
or, How to Make Out on Scarce Resources,” in  Man the Hunter , ed. 
Richard Barry Lee and Irven DeVore (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 
1968), 30–48. 
  2. See Sheena Iyengar,  The Art of Choosing (New York: Twelve, 2011). 
  3. Sendhil Mullainathan and Eldar Shafi r,  Scarcity :  The New Science of 
Having Less and How It Defi nes Our Lives (New York: Times Books, 
2013). 
  4. Maryam Kouchaki and Isaac H. Smith, “The Morning Morality 
Effect: The Infl uence of Time of Day on Unethical Behavior,” 
 Psychological Science 25(1) (January 1, 2014): 95–102; Brian C. 
Gunia, Christopher M. Barnes, and Sunita Sah, “The Morality of 
Larks and Owls: Unethical Behavior Depends on Chronotype as Well 
as Time of Day,”  Psychological Science 25(12) (December 1, 2014): 
2272–2274. 
  5. Anandi Mani et al. “Poverty Impedes Cognitive Function,”  Science 
341(6149) (August 30, 2013): 976–980; Louise Vreugdenburg, 
Janet Bryan, and Eva Kemps, “The Effect of Self-Initiated Weight-
Loss Dieting on Working Memory: The Role of Preoccupying 
Cognitions,”  Appetite 41(3) (December 2003): 291–300. 
  6. Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions 
About Health ,  Wealth ,  and Happiness (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2008); Saugato Datta and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Behavioral 
INTRODUCTION 9
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Design: A New Approach to Development Policy,”  Review of Income 
and Wealth 60(1) (2014): 7–35. 
  7. e.g. Cass R. Sunstein,  Why Nudge ? (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2014); Jason F. Shogren and Laura O. Taylor, “On Behavioral-
Environmental Economics,”  Review of Environmental Economics & 
 Policy 2(1) (January 2008): 26–44. 
  8. Alicia H. Munnell, Wenliang Hou, and Anthony Webb,  NRRI Update 
Shows Half Still Falling Short , Center for Retirement Research, Boston 
College Issue Brief 14–20 (Boston, MA, December 2014), Boston, MA, 
 http://crr.bc.edu/briefs/nrri-update-shows-half-still-falling-short/ 
  9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,  Health ,  United States , 
 2014 , Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Report DHHS 
2015–1232 (Washington, DC, May 2015), 215, Washington, DC, 
 http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus14.pdf 
 10. John B. Dixon, “The Effect of Obesity on Health Outcomes,” 
 Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 316 (2010): 104–8. 
 11. Meera Viswanathan et al. “Interventions to Improve Adherence to 
Self-Administered Medications for Chronic Diseases in the United 
States: A Systematic Review,”  Annals of Internal Medicine 157(11) 
(December 4, 2012): 785–795. 
 12. “Executive Order 13707: Using Behavioral Science Insights to Better 
Serve the American People,”  Federal Register 80(181) (September 
18, 2015): 56365–56367. 
 13. David Halpern,  Inside the Nudge Unit :  How Small Changes Can Make 
a Big Difference (London: Ebury Publishing, 2015). 
 14. See e.g. Sunstein,  Why Nudge ? 
 15. Mario J. Rizzo and Douglas Glen Whitman, “The Knowledge 
Problem of New Paternalism,”  Brigham Young University Law Review 
(4) (2009): 905–968. 
 16. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge . 
 17. Ibid.; Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein, “Libertarian 
Paternalism,”  The American Economic Review 93(2) (May 1, 2003): 
175–179. 
 18. The New York City Obesity Task Force,  Reversing the Epidemic :  The 
New York City Obesity Task Force Plan to Prevent and Control Obesity 
(New York, NY, May 31, 2012), New York, NY,  http://www.nyc.
gov/html/om/pdf/2012/otf_report.pdf 
 19. Oliver Burkeman, “How Bloomberg’s Soda Ban Is a Classic 
Example  of ‘Choice Architecture,’”  The Guardian , July 10, 2012, 
10 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/oliver-burkemans-
blog/2012/jul/10/bloomberg-soda-ban-new-york-freedom 
 20. Richard H. Thaler, “To State the Obvious: A BAN Is Not a NUDGE. 
The Opposite in Fact. So Don’t Blame Bloomberg’s Ban on 
Large  Soda Cups on Us.,” Twitter, @ R _ Thaler , May 31, 2012, 
 https://twitter.com/R_Thaler/status/208273339507150849 
 21. In fact, Thaler and Sunstein are guilty of this as well. One of their 
most cited examples is about the use of defaults to increase organ 
donation—a policy designed to promote a societal, not personal wel-
fare. See Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge . 
 22. Behavioural Insights Team,  Applying Behavioural Insights to Reduce 
Fraud ,  Error and Debt (London, UK, February 2012), London, UK, 
 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/fi le/60539/BIT_FraudErrorDebt_accessible.pdf 
INTRODUCTION 11
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 PART I 
 Theory 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

15
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_2
 Overview of Behavioral Economics 
and Policy 
 Mark   D.   White 
 As philosophers have long recognized, human beings are imperfect and 
often make bad choices that have a negative impact on themselves and 
other people. Sometimes we recognize our own mistakes, and sometimes 
other people bring them to our attention. In the best case scenario we 
learn from our mistakes, but sometimes we need institutions to guide us 
to better ones, whether those come in the form of mentors to give us 
advice on how to live better lives or the state enforcing laws to protect 
citizens from each other. 
 In recent years, however, the emphasis of these institutions has changed 
in two signifi cant ways. First, the focus has shifted from choices and their 
consequences to how we make those choices in the fi rst place. Psychologists 
and economists have subjected the process of decision-making to new 
scrutiny, and their innovative and fascinating research revealed quirks and 
anomalies in how we process information and weigh options. Idealized 
models of “rational choice” are gradually being replaced by new concep-
tions of decision-making that incorporate empirical evidence of psycho-
logical imperfections. Put simply, we seem to know more about  why we 
make bad choices as well as  how we might make better ones. 
 M. D.  White () 
 College of Staten Island/CUNY ,  Staten Island ,  NY ,  USA 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Second, policymakers in government absorbed this new research and 
began to incorporate it into regulation and policymaking itself. Some uses 
were oriented toward public policy ends, such as making recycling bins 
more attractive (to promote proper disposal of waste) and painting fl ies in 
urinals (to reduce clean-up costs in public restrooms). 1 But policymakers 
also began to use behavioral insights to help people make better decisions 
for  themselves , which can be characterized as paternalistic and is therefore 
subject to disagreement from those who believe a government’s proper 
role is to protect citizens from others, not from themselves. 
 As Gerald Dworkin defi nes it, paternalism is “the interference of a state 
or an individual with another person, against their will, and defended or 
motivated by a claim that the person interfered with will be better off or 
protected from harm.” 2 While this defi nition covers paternalistic acts by 
individuals, the focus of this chapter is on paternalistic interventions on the 
part of the state. The canonical statement against paternalism was provided 
by John Stuart Mill in what came to be known as the “harm principle”:
 The only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any 
member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to oth-
ers. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a suffi cient warrant. He 
cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for 
him to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinions of 
others, to do so would be wise, or even right.… The only part of the con-
duct of any one, for which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns 
others. In the part which merely concerns himself, his independence is, of 
right, absolute. Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual 
is sovereign. 3 
 However, the new psychological insights into decision-making have led 
academics and policymakers to doubt that people regularly make decisions 
reliably in their own interests, which in turn motivated a more active role 
of government in helping people pursue those interests. 4 
 In this chapter, I will summarize the development, key results, and 
main applications of the new behavioral science to government paternal-
ism. Then I will offer several criticisms of this new brand of paternalism, 
focusing on the lack of knowledge among policymakers regarding people’s 
true interests and the nature of the manipulation inherent in such behav-
ioral interventions. Lastly, I will survey private uses of these psychological 
insights, including private alternatives to government interventions, the 
topic of many of the chapters in this book. 
16 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE AND CHOICE 
 For decades, mainstream economics enjoyed a broad consensus regarding 
its model of individual decision-making, known as  expected utility maximi-
zation or  constrained preference-satisfaction . 5 This standard choice model 
allowed economists to explain and predict typical economic behavior such 
as consumption, production, and investment decisions, in addition to 
noneconomic topics such as marriage and childbearing decisions, criminal 
activity, and discriminatory hiring. 6 This model consists of several simple 
elements, which I will describe briefl y before introducing recent behav-
ioral critiques of them. 
 First, a person has a set of preferences, a ranking of states of the world 
over which he or she has some choice, such as which size of laundry deter-
gent to buy, which company to invest in, and which job to take. These 
preferences are normally assumed to be “given” to the individual and 
do not change (an assumption arising less from a principled conviction 
and more from a desire for parsimony, as well as humility regarding our 
knowledge of the nature of preference change). 7 Furthermore, they are 
substantively empty: rather than stemming from a psychological state such 
as desire or need, they are ideally taken to be “revealed” by behavior, 
whatever their ultimate source may be. As long as a person’s preferences 
meet basic formal conditions such as consistency and completeness, they 
can be represented by a “utility function” that represents to what degree 
the person’s preferences are satisfi ed. 8 
 Second, persons are faced with certain constraints that limit satisfaction 
of their preferences. These normally take the form of material resource 
constraints, such as scarcity of wealth or capital, or limitations on the time 
available to “spend” on various activities (such as in labor supply deci-
sions). Like preferences, constraints are often assumed to be exogenous, 
although some can be based on earlier choices; for instance, wealth is based 
both on initial endowments and later choices about work and investment. 
 Third, individuals are assumed to have sets of beliefs over the likelihood 
of various uncertain states of the world. These include beliefs about them-
selves, such as which options will satisfy their preferences, as well as beliefs 
about external events, such as whether it will rain on their cousin’s wed-
ding day. Sometimes the two types of beliefs combine, such as whether a 
person will be able to adjust comfortably to living in a new city where she 
is considering taking a job. These probabilities, often based on subjective 
judgment about uncertainty rather than precise objective risk, are used in 
OVERVIEW OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND POLICY 17
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

the decision-making process to discount the amount of utility a person 
will derive from each state of the world. 
 These three elements together defi ne decision-makers’ “problem”: 
maximizing their expected utility, based on their preferences and beliefs, 
within their constraints. This model grounded nearly the entirety of 
microeconomic theory until theoretical and empirical research by deci-
sion theorists and psychologists questioned its real-world applicability. For 
example, in the 1950s, Herbert Simon introduced the concept of  bounded 
rationality , which encapsulated the imperfections of and limitations on 
human rationality. As Simon described the standard model of choice, the 
agent
 is assumed to have knowledge of the relevant aspects of his environment 
which, if not absolutely complete, is at least impressively clear and volu-
minous. He is assumed also to have a well-organized and stable system of 
preferences, and a skill in computation that enables him to calculate, for the 
alternative courses of action that are available to him, which of these will 
permit him to reach the highest attainable point on his preference scale. 9 
 As an alternative, Simon introduced the concept of  satisfi cing , in which 
an individual facing a diffi cult choice lacks either the time or the mental 
capacity to select the perfectly optimal decision, and instead optimizes 
these scarce resources by making a decision that is “good enough” (or 
satisfactory). 10 In this way, the person meets some internal threshold of 
preference- satisfaction even though it may not be the choice he or she 
would make with infi nite time and computing power. Now a signifi -
cant topic of study by economists, psychologists, and philosophers alike, 
Simon’s concept of satisfi cing was the fi rst major challenge to the stan-
dard economic model of choice, which was revealed to be an abstract 
mathematical ideal that neglected to consider or incorporate the limited 
decision-making capacities of real human beings. 11 
 Simon’s bounded rationality emphasizes the limits of our deliberative 
and executive faculties: that our rationality and willpower are limited and 
do not always operate as predicted by textbook models of decision- making. 
Later, psychologists led by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky added 
details and nuance to Simon’s ideas, supported by years of  psychological 
experiments. 12 These researchers identifi ed a number of common cogni-
tive biases, dysfunctions, and heuristics that cause decision-making pro-
cesses to differ from the ideal textbook depictions. For example, the 
18 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 endowment effect describes the phenomenon by which people place more 
value on an item when it is in their possession than when it is not. This 
is also related to  loss aversion , by which people feel more harmed by a 
loss of given magnitude than they are helped by an identical gain. So we 
would rather give up $100 that we never received than lose $100 we 
have, and we would demand more money to part with an item we owe 
than we would have paid to get it in the fi rst place. Also, hyperbolic dis-
counting explains why our preferences seem to change over time, and why 
an unpleasant event (such as a root canal) that a person has no problem 
scheduling six months from now seems much worse the day before it is set 
to happen; this is very useful to modeling weakness of will, especially with 
regard to procrastination. 13 
 These cognitive biases affect our preferences, from which, in the tra-
ditional model of choice, values are derived. Other fi ndings from behav-
ioral research address how we incorporate new information into our set 
of beliefs. Instead of simply updating our beliefs with any new informa-
tion we acquire, we do so in a way that privileges some information over 
other. For example,  confi rmation bias implies that we give more attention 
and weight to new information that confi rms our current beliefs (and less 
attention and weight to information that challenges them); this can be 
seen in choices of news sources, in which people often choose cable news 
stations that confi rm their preexisting political positions.  Optimism bias , 
as the name suggests, describes our propensity to maintain exaggerated 
beliefs about ourselves and our futures; this can be illustrated by the “it 
can’t happen to me” effect when hearing mortality rates about smoking, 
and the statistic that well over 50 % of people think they are above average 
drivers (which is unlikely if we assume a fairly symmetrical distribution of 
driving skill). 
 Most relevant for the discussion of nudges, behavioral studies also dem-
onstrate the power of  framing in infl uencing how we make choices, which 
implies quirks in how both our preferences and information are affected. 
For example, patients are more optimistic when told that a procedure 
has a survival rate of 90 % than when they are told that it has a mortality 
rate of 10 %, a result that refl ects the emotional impact of how a choice is 
framed. We see this also when there is a widely publicized plane crash and 
more people take road trips, despite the much higher mortality rate on the 
highway, because of the visceral impact of the news. Finally, marketers are 
testaments to framing effects, expert at promoting products in order to 
increase sales. 14 
OVERVIEW OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND POLICY 19
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND NUDGE POLICY 
 In recent years,  behavioral economists have been incorporating the numer-
ous insights of Kahneman, Tversky, and their colleagues into standard 
models of choice and experiments of their own. One of the pioneers of 
behavioral economics, Richard Thaler, explained a number of “anom-
alies” in economic behavior with the new behavioral science, and also 
developed the area of  behavioral fi nance , showing how fi nancial deci-
sion-making is affected by psychological quirks that interfere with the 
fl awless mathematical precision previously assumed to be the hallmark 
of fi nance. 15 Other behavioral economists examined how procrastination 
arises from rational actors acting under the infl uence of various cognitive 
fl aws and dysfunctions. 16 Finally, experimental economists such as Vernon 
Smith have tested the predictions of many mainstream models of choice 
and observed results consistent with behavioral economics, particularly 
when it comes to the pursuit of self-interest. In the realm of game theory, 
for instance, participants in situations such as the Ultimatum game are 
“supposed to” reveal self-interest but instead display altruistic behavior, 
even toward other players who are strangers and are not expected to 
reciprocate. 17 
 It did not take long for the models of behavioral economics to be 
applied to the policy realm, initiated by legal scholars working in the 
hybrid fi eld of  behavioral law and economics . 18 Scholars in this fi eld 
studied not only how the various cognitive biases and dysfunctions 
identifi ed by psychologists affected legal outcomes, such as jury deci-
sions, contract formation, and even judges’ opinions, but they also 
suggested ways that those same decision-making anomalies could be 
harnessed to  improve outcomes in all areas of policy, including both 
general outcomes, such as recycling efforts and organ donation, as 
well as more individual-focused efforts, such as retirements savings and 
weight loss. 
 In 2008, behavioral economist Richard Thaler and legal scholar Cass 
Sunstein published their book  Nudge , presenting their earlier academic 
work on behaviorally based policy interventions to a broader audience. 19 
According to them:
 It is legitimate … to try to infl uence people’s behavior in order to make 
their lives longer, healthier, and better. In other words, we argue for self- 
conscious efforts, by institutions in the private sector and also by govern-
ment, to steer people’s choices in directions that will improve their lives. 20 
20 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 In this spirit, Thaler and Sunstein advocate for  nudges , which they defi ne 
as “any aspect of the choice architecture that alters people’s behavior in a 
predictable way without forbidding any options or signifi cantly changing 
their economic incentives.” 21 As opposed to traditional paternalist tools 
such as mandates, bans, taxes, and subsidies, which affect the material 
availability or price of choices, nudges are changes to the choice envi-
ronment (or  choice architecture ) around options, using the same cogni-
tive biases and dysfunctions that motivate them to steer people toward 
choices that better serve their interests. Because choices themselves are 
not affected, nudge advocates regard their brand of paternalism as “lib-
ertarian” in the sense that it is more respectful of individual autonomy 
and liberty because people are free to make the same (allegedly inferior) 
choices they would have made without the nudge. 
 Thaler and Sunstein give many examples of nudges in their academic 
and popular work, but there are several well-known examples they empha-
size throughout. In one, a manager of a cafeteria in an offi ce building is 
tasked with arranging the food items. 22 To promote healthy eating among 
the workers in the building without foreclosing any options, the manager 
chooses to put healthier options at the front of the shelf and in the best 
light, to take advantage of people’s propensity toward laziness and the 
illusion of well-lit items as being tastier. While customers are free to take 
the poorly lit and hard-to-reach puddings, the manager takes advantage of 
their behavioral quirks to guide them toward healthier choices. 
 In another example, employers (or policymakers acting through them) 
are concerned that employees are not saving enough for retirement—in 
particular, they are not taking advantage of 401(k) plans, contributions 
to which are not only tax exempt but are often matched by employers. 23 
The forms that new employees fi ll out at human resources typically require 
active choice to enroll in such a program; in other words, the default choice 
is nonenrollment (also known as “opt-in”). Because studies show that 
people often defer to the default choice on a form (either through active 
or passive choice), employers who want to promote savings can switch the 
default choice to enrollment (also known as “opt-out”). In doing so, they 
leverage people’s unthinking acceptance of the default choice by switch-
ing the default to the option that they believe is in people’s best interests. 
 Other nudges take the form of providing information, which works 
on several levels. One popular instance of this is mandatory nutritional 
labeling in restaurants. On the one hand, this provides information, which 
does not make use of cognitive biases or dysfunctions but rather enhances 
OVERVIEW OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND POLICY 21
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

rational deliberation over choices. On the other hand, the specifi c nutri-
tional details that are emphasized are implied to be the most important, 
triggering the  availability bias that gives more weight to readily available 
information; a focus on fat content, for instance, may distract a food con-
sumer from carbohydrate content, which he may regard as more impor-
tant. A related example is the familiar nutritional labels on packaged food 
products, listing the amount of fat, carbohydrate, and other contents, 
which health advocates argue should be made more prominent and color-
ful, making use of cognitive biases behind framing effects to both grab 
consumers’ attention and make information easier to digest. 24 
 PROBLEMS WITH NUDGES 
 The reasons to be concerned about nudges can be split into three catego-
ries: epistemic, ethical, and practical. These categories overlap to some 
extent, and the epistemic problems are the primary ones that lead to the 
most signifi cant ethical and practical problems. All three, however, com-
bine to paint a different picture of nudges than the one offered by advo-
cates of this new brand of paternalism. 25 
 The epistemic problem with nudges derives from the inability of policy-
makers to know the true interests of the people being nudged. Certainly, 
nudge designers have some idea of the interests they wish to promote with 
behavioral interventions: in Thaler and Sunstein’s examples, cafeterias are 
designed to promote healthy eating and default enrollment in retirement 
plans is meant to promote savings. Policymakers do not know, however, 
if these nudges promote the true interests of any given individual, much 
less that of the population in general. Health and wealth are of interest to 
all in a very general and trivial way, but each person interprets them and 
combines them in different ways with other important interests, refl ect-
ing a complexity about which policymakers have no knowledge. Based 
on economic models of choice which normally posit a single end or goal, 
policymakers have a narrow, myopic view of interests that individuals pur-
sue, which in turn limits the goals of nudges. 
 Whereas nudges focus on promoting one vague interest, such as 
health or wealth, individuals have a multiplicity of interests that combine 
in various ways according to the context of each choice situation. They 
care about material prosperity in some way, but each has his or her own 
goals with respect to wealth as well as ways they prefer to pursue it; the 
same goes for health or any other general goal assumed by policymakers.
22 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Furthermore, they have other interests that coincide or compete with pur-
suing their individual conceptions of wealth or health. Some are very per-
sonal interests, such as other individual goals that may represent success 
more than wealth does, or simply a desire to live life to the fullest, even if 
that compromises a single-minded focus on simpler goals. People also have 
interests in other people’s well-being, happiness, and success, and often 
sacrifi ce their own personal interests to help others. Finally, individuals 
have interests in principles and ideals, whether personal or societal. People 
limit their pursuit of self-interest according to their moral codes, refusing 
to lie or steal even when it would benefi t them (or others). They also sac-
rifi ce their own well- being—and sometimes even their lives—in the service 
of ideals such as justice, equality, or freedom. The variety of interests that 
individuals pursue refl ects their multifaceted nature, and the ways that 
they combine in different circumstances shows their overall complexity. 
While people may have many interests of different kinds, they do not nec-
essarily pursue all of them in every decision-making context. Sometimes 
they make decisions according to simple preferences, and other times they 
take the wider social impact of the decisions into account. 
 As a result of the multifaceted and complex nature of interests, nudges 
designed to promote one interest, even if it is an interest held by an indi-
vidual, will have unintended and possibly adverse effects on other interests 
that the individual may value just as much—if not more—than the one 
targeted by the nudge. Interventions to increase retirement savings, for 
example, may negatively affect individuals’ other goals, fi nancial or other-
wise. Nudges to lower fat intake may end up increasing individuals’ con-
sumptions of sugar, which may be of greater concern to them. It is easy 
to say that people can simply avoid nudges that are not in their interests, 
but the subtle way that nudges work makes this diffi cult (as we will discuss 
below). Without an appreciation of the complexity of individuals’ inter-
ests, a policymaker cannot anticipate how a nudge in one area will affect 
other parts of their lives. 
 Even if policymakers did appreciate the complex and multifaceted 
nature of interests, they have no access to information regarding them 
because interests are inherently subjective. Choices that they see as impru-
dent or “mistaken” may very well advance the true interests of the people 
making them. People themselves are often unaware of the full range of 
their interests; many recent studies suggest that people are poor estima-
tors of their own well-being or of how much satisfaction they will derive 
from various choices. 26 Nonetheless, individuals have a fi rmer grasp on the 
OVERVIEW OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND POLICY 23
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

various interests on which they make decisions than an outside observer 
does, especially disinterested ones such as researchers or policymakers 
who have no way to know any person’s true interests. John Stuart Mill 
put this well when he wrote:
 The strongest of all the arguments against the interference of the public 
with purely personal conduct is that, when it does interfere, the odds are 
that it interferes wrongly, and in the wrong place. On questions of social 
morality, of duty to others, the opinion of the public, that is, of an overrul-
ing majority, though often wrong, is likely to be still oftener right; because 
on such questions they are only required to judge of their own interests; 
of the manner in which some mode of conduct, if allowed to be practiced, 
would affect themselves. But the opinion of a similar majority, imposed as a 
law on the minority, on questions of self-regarding conduct, is quite as likely 
to be wrong as right; for in these cases public opinion means, at the best, 
some people’s opinion of what is good or bad for other people. 27 
 Because of this ignorance of people’s true interests, policymakers who judge 
that people’s choices are “mistaken” are basing this judgment on interests 
they have decided are appropriate or “obvious.” Furthermore, these are 
the same interests that form the basis for nudges designed to “correct” 
these bad choices, interests that are defi ned vaguely enough to be of  some 
possible relevance to most people but closely correspond to no one’s true 
interests, much less to the degree that they matter to any one person. 
 This imposition of interests is one of the key ethical problems with 
nudges: it violates a core principle of modern democracies, liberal neu-
trality, which maintains that individuals have the right to pursue their 
own ideas of the good life, provided they do not wrongfully interfere with 
the rights of others to do the same. Again, John Stuart Mill provided the 
defi nitive statement:
 As it is useful that while mankind are imperfect there should be different 
opinions, so it is that there should be different experiments in living; that 
free scope should be given to varieties of character, short of injury to others; 
and that the worth of different modes of life should be proved practically, 
when any one thinks fi t to try them. It is desirable, in short, that in things 
which do not primarily concern others, individuality should assert itself. 28 
 At its most essential, liberal neutrality implies a person’s right to make 
choices in his or her own interests as the person understands them, not as 
24 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

a policymaker defi nes them. Paternalism of any type violates liberal neu-
trality and the personal autonomy it protects; as philosopher Dan Brock 
wrote,
 Paternalistic interference involves the claim of one person to know better 
what is good for another person than that other person him- or herself 
does. It involves the substitution by the paternalistic interferer of his or her 
conception of what is good for another for that other’s own conception of 
his or her good. If this involves a claim to know the objectively correct con-
ception of another’s good—what ultimate values and aims defi ne another 
competent individual’s good, independent of whether that other accepts 
them—then it is ethically problematic. 29 
 This is widely recognized as a criticism of traditional paternalist policies 
such as bans or taxes that limit or modify choices, but nudge advocates 
argue that it does not apply to mere alterations to choice architecture, 
such as changing arrangement of options or default choices that do not 
foreclose choices. 
 However, this argument ignores the way that nudges work: by making 
use of the same cognitive biases and dysfunctions that motivated them in 
the fi rst place. For example, enrolling new employees in retirement plans 
by default is effective at increasing savings because default choices have 
an outsized impact on choices, not because it inspires better decision- 
making. Another choice is still possible, but the cognitive defects on which 
nudges rely make other choices more diffi cult to make. Furthermore, this 
is not an incidental effect of nudges but the basis on which they operate, 
as demonstrated by their success in altering choices. For example, Thaler 
and Sunstein point to the enormous increase in 401(k) enrollment under 
an opt-out plan. 30 This cannot be taken as evidence that people are making 
better choices in their true interests, but merely a testament to the effec-
tiveness of designed defaults at infl uencing choice. 
 In this way, nudges threaten autonomy on two different scales: by 
imposing policymaker’s idea of interests for people’s own, thereby inter-
fering with people’s long-term pursuit of their vision of the good life, 
and also by infl uencing their smaller day-to-day decisions and the way 
people make them. While traditional paternalism may affect choices, such 
as by increasing the cost of certain options, it leaves people free to make 
their choice without interfering with their decision-making process itself. 
Nudges do not engage people’s rational deliberative faculties, however, 
OVERVIEW OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND POLICY 25
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

but instead subvert them, relying on cognitive biases and dysfunctions to 
circumvent rational choice. The cafeteria manager’s rearrangement of food 
items is not meant to convince her customers of the importance of mak-
ing healthy choices; it relies on subtle psychological effects to steer them 
toward choices she thinks are better for them. This can be seen even more 
directly in the manipulation of default choices, which takes advantage of 
simple laziness and inertia to guide choice rather than inspiring deeper 
consideration of the various options. In this way, the interference with 
choice is not simply in terms of results but also process, which, as we will 
see, has longer-term ramifi cations for our cognitive abilities themselves. 
 Finally, the epistemic problem implies that, in practical terms, nudges 
cannot do what they claim: to help people make better choices in their 
own interests. Policymakers may sincerely want to help people improve 
their lives along some general measures such as health or wealth, but they 
cannot promote the true complex and multifaceted interests of which they 
have no knowledge. As Mario Rizzo and Glen Whitman wrote, comparing 
the knowledge problem in nudge policy with Friedrich von Hayek’s argu-
ments against government planning based on similar issues:
 If well-meaning policymakers possess all the relevant information about 
individuals’ true preferences, their cognitive biases, and the choice con-
texts in which they manifest themselves,  then policymakers could potentially 
implement paternalist policies that improve the welfare of individuals by 
their own standards. But lacking such information, we cannot conclude that 
actual paternalism will make their decisions better; under a wide range of 
circumstances, it will even make them worse. 31 
 Furthermore, by promoting the interests they have chosen, policymak-
ers are interfering with individuals’ pursuit of their own interests in ways 
that cannot easily be resisted, given the subtle methods by which nudges 
operate. 
 This failure of nudges to achieve their stated aim is their most basic prac-
tical shortcoming, but it is not the only adverse effect of nudges, the most 
important of which may be their long-term impact on deliberative pro-
cesses. 32 As we have discussed, the goal of nudges is to steer people toward 
better choices, not to improve their faculties of decision-making. As legal 
scholar and federal judge Richard Posner wrote of nudge paternalists, “all 
their suggestions for legal reform are of devices for getting around, rather 
than dispelling, our irrational tendencies.” 33 As stated above, altering the 
26 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

choice architecture does not engage the rational deliberation but rather 
subverts it by steering individuals’ choices, often without people being 
aware of the nudge. Rather than acting to lessen the impact of cognitive 
biases and dysfunctions and bring decision-making closer to the textbook 
model of rationality, nudges rely on these cognitive anomalies to achieve 
the policymaker’s desired outcome without addressing the core cause of 
the problem. 
 Furthermore, the inability of people to make mistakes when nudged 
into “better choices” denies them the benefi t of learning from one’s 
mistakes, an essential tool of cognitive development of which every 
parent is well aware. Furthermore, the stagnation of decision-making 
processes will lead to more “bad choices” and therefore, the contin-
ued “need” for nudges, as legal scholars Jonathan Klick and Gregory 
Mitchell explain:
 Research on self-fulfi lling prophecies warns that regulated parties are likely 
to become the weak decision-makers envisioned by paternalistic policy mak-
ers, as paternalistic regulations undercut personal incentives to invest in cog-
nitive capital and the regulated parties conform to the expectancies of the 
paternalist. 34 
 The reasonable alternative is to help people to overcome their decision- 
making fl aws to make better choices in their own interests; as another 
legal scholar, Jeffrey Rachlinski, writes, “The role of individual learning 
and adaptation … cannot be ignored in assessing the need for paternal-
ism. Simple experience might, in some contexts, be a much better cure for 
cognitive missteps than adopting a paternalist intervention.” 35 
 BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
 To this point, we have discussed behavioral interventions and nudges 
mostly in the context of government policymakers acting in their idea of 
their citizens’ interests. However, such tools are used not only by the state 
but also by private parties for their own purposes. In this section, I will 
introduce two general ways in which private parties use behavioral insights 
(each of which will be discussed at length in other chapters in this book): 
fi rms using them on consumers in order to increase profi ts and individu-
als using them on themselves to circumvent their own cognitive fl aws and 
dysfunctions. 
OVERVIEW OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND POLICY 27
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Profi t-Maximizing Behavioral Interventions 
 Long before the advent of modern behavioral research, private compa-
nies—especially retailers, advertisers, and marketers—relied on intuitive 
behavioral insights to sell their products. 36 Advertisers use emotional 
appeals to make products as banal as soda seem like the key to popularity 
and esteem. Experts who design the fl oor plans for supermarkets strategi-
cally place the most profi table items around the periphery of the store and 
impulse purchases near the checkout line. Contracts for large purchases or 
loans are written to obscure details to which consumers may object while 
drawing attention to the low price or interest rate. If government nudges 
are to be characterized as manipulative, subverting people’s rational facul-
ties to obtain a desired result, private companies may be the masters at the 
practice. 
 Despite the similarities in the manipulative tactics employed by both, 
there is a critical difference in the use of behavioral interventions by the 
government and private companies: their purpose or goal. Despite their 
psychological subtlety, the underlying ethical problem with government 
nudges is the same as with traditional state paternalism: the attempt to 
infl uence people’s behavior  in their own interests , whether policymak-
ers have knowledge of those interests or not. When people’s choices 
are steered in their own interests (or policymakers’ idea of them), they 
are blocked from making those choices themselves. As John Stuart Mill 
pointed out, the proper role of government is to protect citizens from 
each other, not from themselves; a person’s well-being and other interests 
are the concern and legitimate domain of that person only. 
 Behavioral interventions on the part of private companies, however, 
are not designed to benefi t their customer’s interests, but those of the 
owners of the company, interests which are usually assumed to be primar-
ily to increase profi t. Advertising companies do not cast young beautiful 
people in their beer commercials simply to make their customers feel good 
about themselves and the product—they want to make their customers 
feel good so they will buy more beer. Supermarkets are designed the way 
they are to exploit well-known cognitive biases and dysfunctions among 
shoppers to maximize the store’s profi t. In other words, private companies 
are not acting paternalistically when they use behavioral insights to change 
consumers’ behavior; fi rms do not assume any interests on the part of the 
consumers because they are using behavioral interventions to promote 
their own. 
28 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Ironically, the self-serving nature of behavioral interventions among 
private companies makes them less problematic than when government 
policymakers nudge people ostensibly in their own interests. The element 
of manipulation is the same, but this is not the primary concern with 
government nudges anyway; for instance, nudges designed to promote 
collective goals such as recycling or organ donation are less troubling than 
nudges designed to help people eat better for their own health because 
they assume no knowledge of individuals’ own interests. 37 The critical 
issue with public nudges is paternalism, the presumptive usurpation of 
decision-making autonomy in people’s own interests, an aspect that is 
absent from behavioral interventions used by companies to increase profi t. 
Manipulation that impairs people’s use of their full rational faculties is a 
concern when anyone engages in it, but even more so when it is used to 
steer people’s choices in interests that were chosen for them. 
 Furthermore, people  expect private companies—again, especially retail-
ers, advertisers, and marketers—to use whatever means they can to sell 
their products (outside of fraud). Customers are conditioned to be skepti-
cal of outrageous claims, and they expect subtle psychological techniques 
to be used. There is room for criticism of the manipulation involved, but 
no one is surprised that companies intent on making a profi t use whatever 
means they can, within the law, to do that—and if they do not like the 
manipulation they perceive, they are free to take their business to competi-
tors they believe are less manipulative. But most people, regardless of their 
views on the size and scope of government, do not expect their govern-
ment to practice manipulation, especially when designed to promote their 
own interests. (Also, unlike the private case, there is often no competitor 
that citizens can switch to in order to avoid government manipulation.) 
As Edward Glaeser wrote, using the word “persuasion” in the sense of 
subversion of rational deliberation, “Persuasion lies at the heart of much 
of [nudge policy], and it is not obvious that we want governments to 
become more adept at persuading voters or for governments to invest in 
infrastructure that will support persuasion.” 38 
 Individual, Self-Focused Nudges 
 The other way in which private agents can make use of behavioral insights 
is to improve their own lives by countering or leveraging their own cogni-
tive biases and dysfunctions to make better decisions in their own inter-
ests. 39 This can take various forms, including self-motivated correctional 
OVERVIEW OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND POLICY 29
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

behavior, cooperation involving a number of people, or commercial prod-
ucts that help people better manage their decision-making. 
 In the fi rst case, people can recognize common fl aws in their own 
decision- making and take measures to either combat them or make use of 
them. This can take the form of simple steps, such as the common advice 
not to go grocery shopping while hungry when one would be more likely 
to succumb to temptation to buy junk food. Other examples include the 
procrastinator who spends too much time surfi ng the Internet instead of 
completing projects and so takes steps to minimize her distractions before 
starting work (such as fi nding a spot with no Internet connection), or the 
person who wants to exercise fi rst thing in the morning and so lays out his 
workout clothes the night before, exploiting his natural tendency toward 
laziness and giving him one less excuse to put it off. All of these examples 
involve individuals recognizing circumstances that interfere with pursu-
ing their own goals, particularly “in the moment,” and then taking steps 
to avoid them before those circumstances occur, or leveraging them—as 
government nudges do—to help further their goals. 
 These efforts are often more successful when engaged in with other 
people. Individuals can all too easily make excuses to themselves for why 
they did not exercise or work as planned, but they may feel more obliga-
tion to other people with whom they promised to exercise or work. For 
example, common advice for people trying to maintain a regular exercise 
schedule is to commit to work out with a friend; writers who need help 
making deadlines often form reading groups to which they are responsible 
to share something at regular meetings. This type of  social scaffolding to 
help combat lack of willpower can also be organized by nonprofi ts, such 
as support groups for recovering addicts, or be commercialized, as in the 
case of programs such as Weight Watchers. 
 Weight Watchers is also an example of third-party initiatives to help 
people overcome cognitive biases or dysfunctions. For example, many 
fi rms offer monitoring devices, such as FitBit and word count trackers, 
that allow individuals to keep track of their progress toward a goal (such as 
exercise and writing) and provide an incentive to maintain or increase the 
level of effort. The wealth of information counters many biases that are 
enabled by ignorance, such as confi rmation and optimism biases that take 
advantage of limited information, and the regular notices or updates these 
products provide to counter natural tendencies to procrastinate or ratio-
nalize their failures of willpower. Some also provide rewards for reaching 
30 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

a short-term goal, such as a daily target for physical activity or a medal-
lion for a certain length of sobriety, which satisfi es individuals’ desires for 
encouragement and recognition of progress. 
 Many of these private uses of behavioral science to further goals involve 
some element of manipulation, but the justifi cation for the manipulation 
is much different than in the case of government nudges. As opposed to 
state paternalism, these private behavioral mechanisms are chosen volun-
tarily by individuals who seek out help making better decisions to further 
their interests. As with all decisions, people make good ones and bad ones, 
and this includes the choice to seek help making decisions. But the epis-
temic problem implies that individuals have better information regarding 
their own interests and failures to pursue them effectively, so self-initiated 
efforts to improve their decision-making are more likely to be helpful than 
government nudges imposed by policymakers based on interests assumed 
on behalf of individuals. Of course, this does not preclude the state from 
 offering products and programs to help people make better decisions, just 
as fi rms and nonprofi t fi rms do, but it does imply, as explained above, that 
forcing nudges on people without their knowledge or consent is not in 
their true interests and raises serious concerns regarding autonomy. 
 CONCLUSION 
 This chapter introduced and summarized some of the ethical and practi-
cal aspects of behavioral interventions on the part of the government as 
well as private parties such as individuals and fi rms. In the rest of this 
book, other scholars will explore these issues in more depth, starting with 
private efforts to improve decision-making, the extent of manipulation 
in marketing, and government efforts to infl uence choice in areas such 
as health care and consumer fi nance. While the subversion of rational 
processes of deliberation is an important issue to consider with respect to 
all behavioral interventions, it is the government’s use of these measures 
to steer people’s choices in their own interests that uniquely invokes the 
dangers of paternalism and the denial of personal autonomy to pursue 
one’s idea of the good life. Behavioral interactions that are initiated and 
directed by decision-makers themselves, however, allow people to make 
better choices, either by overcoming or by leveraging their cognitive 
biases and dysfunctions, and more important, to do so in their own true 
interests. 
OVERVIEW OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND POLICY 31
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 NOTES 
  1. For a survey of such policy initiatives and the behavioral science rele-
vant to them, see Peter John et al.  Nudge ,  Nudge ,  Think ,  Think : 
 Experimenting with Ways to Change Civic Behaviour (London: 
Bloomsbury Academic, 2011). 
  2. Gerald Dworkin, “Paternalism,”  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 
June 4, 2014, at  http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/paternalism/ 
  3. John Stuart Mill,  On Liberty , ed. D. Spitz (New York: W.W. Norton, 
1975), 10–11. 
  4. For recent defenses of paternalism in general based on behavioral 
insights, see Cass Sunstein,  Why Nudge ?  The Politics of Libertarian 
Paternalism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2014), ch. 1; Sarah 
Conly, 
 Against 
Autonomy : 
 Justifying 
Coercive 
Paternalism 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 20–23. For a 
defense of Mill against their criticisms, see Mark D. White, “The 
Crucial Importance of Interests in Libertarian Paternalism,” forth-
coming in Klaus Mathis and Avishalom Tor (eds),  Nudging: 
Possibilities, Limitations and Applications in European Law and 
Economics (Dordrecht: Springer, 2016), 21–38. 
  5. For a thorough treatment, see Shaun Hargreaves Heap et al.  The 
Theory of Choice :  A Critical Guide (Oxford: Blackwell, 1992). 
  6. Much of this work started with Gary Becker,  The Economic Approach 
to Human Behavior (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976). 
  7. On this, see Till Grüne-Yanoff and Sven Ove Hansson,  Preference 
Change :  Approaches from Philosophy ,  Economics and Psychology 
(Dordrecht: Springer, 2009). 
  8. Note, however, that the empty nature of preferences renders this con-
cept of utility empty as well; it bears no relationship to meaningful 
concepts of utility as used as philosophers such as Jeremy Bentham or 
John Stuart Mill. See John Broome, “Utility,” in  Ethics Out of 
Economics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 
19–28. 
  9. Herbert Simon, “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice,”  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 69 (1955): 99–118, at 99. 
 10. Herbert Simon, “Rational Choice and the Structure of the 
Environment,”  Psychological Review 63 (1956): 129–138. More 
recently, the idea of limitations on decision-making capacity suggests 
32 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

the possibility of “too much choice,” which has been emphasized by 
Barry Schwartz,  The Paradox of Choice :  Why More Is Less (New York: 
Harper, 2004), and Sheena Iyengar,  The Art of Choosing (New York: 
Grand Central, 2010). 
 11. In a broader sense, satisfi cing may represent optimal decision-making 
in that it makes the best use of scarce decision-making resources, but 
in the narrower sense, it is still considered an alternative to 
optimizing. 
 12. Collections of this work include Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and 
Amos Tversky (eds),  Judgment Under Uncertainty :  Heuristics and 
Biases (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982); Kahneman 
and Tversky (eds),  Choices ,  Values ,  and Frames (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000); and Thomas Gilovich, Dale 
Griffi n, and Daniel Kahneman (eds),  Heuristics and Biases :  The 
Psychology of Intuitive Judgment (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002). For a recent summary, see Kahneman,  Thinking ,  Fast 
and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011). 
 13. George Ainslie,  Breakdown of Will (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2001), and “Procrastination: The Basic Impulse,” in Chrisoula 
Andreou and Mark D. White (eds.),  The Thief of Time :  Philosophical 
Essays on Procrastination (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 
11–27. 
 14. For a summary, see Erik Angner,  A Course in Behavioral Economics, 
2nd edn (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016). For an engaging 
popular treatment of these various cognitive biases, dysfunctions, and 
heuristics, see Dan Ariely,  Predictably Irrational :  The Hidden Forces 
That Shape Our Decisions (New York: Harper Perennial, 2010). 
 15. See Thaler’s books  The Winner ’ s Curse :  Paradoxes and Anomalies of 
Economic Life (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994),  Quasi-
Rational Economics (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1994), and 
his edited books,  Advances in Behavioral Finance (New York: Russell 
Sage Foundation, 1993) and  Advances in Behavioral Economics , 
 Volume II (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005). 
 16. See George Akerlof, “Procrastination and Obedience,” in  Explorations 
in Pragmatic Economics (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 
209–231; and Ted O’Donoghue and Matthew Rabin, “Doing It 
Now or Later,”  American Economic Review 89 (1999): 103–124 (the 
fi rst of several papers by O’Donoghue and Rabin on the topic). 
OVERVIEW OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND POLICY 33
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 17. See, for instance, Charles R. Plott and Vernon L. Smith,  Handbook of 
Experimental Economics Results ,  Volume 1 (Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 2008). 
 18. For seminal early work, see Cass Sunstein (ed.),  Behavioral Law & 
 Economics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), and 
Francesco Parisi and Vernon L. Smith (eds.),  The Law and Economics 
of Irrational Behavior (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2005). 
 19. Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions About 
Health ,  Wealth ,  and Happiness (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2008); their earlier academic work includes Sunstein and Thaler, 
“Libertarian Paternalism Is Not an Oxymoron,”  University of Chicago 
Law Review 70 (2001): 1159–1202, and Thaler and Sunstein, 
“Libertarian Paternalism,”  American Economic Review Papers and 
Proceedings 93 (2003): 175–179. Other work at the same time that 
advocated similar ideas includes Russell B. Korobkin and Thomas S. 
Ulen. “Law and Behavioral Science: Removing the Rationality 
Assumption from Law and Economics,”  California Law Review 88 
(2000): 1051–1144; Colin Camerer et al, “Regulation for 
Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the Case for ‘Asymmetric 
Paternalism,’”  University of Pennsylvania Law Review 151 (2003): 
1211–1254; and Christine Jolls and Cass Sunstein, “Debiasing 
Through Law,”  Journal of Legal Studies 35 (2006): 199–241. 
 20. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge , 5. 
 21. Ibid., 6. 
 22. Ibid., 1–3; Sunstein and Thaler, “Libertarian Paternalism Is Not an 
Oxymoron,” 1164–1166. 
 23. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge , ch. 6; Sunstein and Thaler, “Libertarian 
Paternalism Is Not an Oxymoron,” 1172–1173. 
 24. See Ezekiel J. Emanuel, “Healthy Labels, Not Stealthy Labels,”  The 
New York Times , March 5, 2012, available at  http://opinionator.blogs.
nytimes.com/2012/03/05/healthy-labels-not-stealthy-labels/ 
 25. For more detail on these problems, see Mark D. White,  The 
Manipulation of Choice :  Ethics and Libertarian Paternalism (New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013); for similar points, see also Riccardo 
Rebonato,  Taking Liberties :  A Critical Examination of Libertarian 
Paternalism (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012). 
 26. See, in general, Daniel Gilbert,  Stumbling on Happiness (New York: 
Vintage, 2005); for more detail, see George Loewenstein and David 
34 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Schkade, “Wouldn’t It Be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings,” in 
Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz (eds),  Well-
Being :  The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology (New York: Russell Sage 
Foundation, 1999), 85–105; and Daniel Gilbert and Timothy D. 
Wilson, “Miswanting: Some Problems in the Forecasting of Future 
Affection States.” in Joseph P. Forgas (ed.),  Feeling and Thinking : 
 The Role of Affect in Social Cognition (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000), 178–197. 
 27. Mill,  On Liberty , 78. 
 28. Ibid., 54. 
 29. Dan W. Brock, “Paternalism and Autonomy,”  Ethics 98 (1988): 550–
565, at 559. 
 30. Thaler and Sunstein, “Libertarian Paternalism Is Not an Oxymoron,” 
1172–1173. 
 31. Mario Rizzo and Glen Whitman, “The Knowledge Problem of New 
Paternalism,”  Brigham Young University Law Review (2009): 905–
968, at 910; see also Friedrich von Hayek, “The Use of Knowledge in 
Society,” in  Individualism and Economic Order (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1948), 77–91. 
 32. For instance, see Jonathan Klick and Gregory Mitchell, “Government 
Regulation of Irrationality: Moral and Cognitive Hazards,”  Minnesota 
Law Review 90 (2006): 1620–1663. 
 33. Richard Posner, “Rational Choice, Behavioral Economics, and the 
Law,”  Stanford Law Review 50 (1998): 1551–1575, at 1575. 
 34. Klick and Mitchell, “Government Regulation of Irrationality,” 
1626–1627. 
 35. Jeffrey J. Rachlinski, “The Uncertain Psychological Case for 
Paternalism,”  Northwestern University Law Review 97 (2003): 1165–
1225, at 1214. 
 36. See Martin Lindstrom,  Brandwashed :  Tricks Companies Use to 
Manipulate Our Minds and Persuade Us to Buy (New York: Crown, 
2011) and  Buyology :  Truth and Lies About Why We Buy (New York: 
Crown, 2008); Ellen Ruppel Shell,  Cheap :  The High Cost of Discount 
Culture (New York: Penguin, 2009); William Poundstone,  Priceless : 
 The Myth of Fair Value ( and How to Take Advantage of It ) (New York: 
Hill and Wang, 2010); and Eduardo Porter,  The Price of Everything : 
 Solving the Mystery of Why We Pay What We Do (New York: Portfolio, 
2011). 
OVERVIEW OF BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND POLICY 35
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 37. For more evidence regarding this use of nudges, see John et al.  Nudge , 
 Nudge ,  Think ,  Think ; for skepticism regarding the ability of nudges to 
address large-scale social problems, see Evan Selinger and Kyle Powys 
Whyte, “Nudging Cannot Solve Complex Policy Problems,” 
 European Journal of Risk Regulation 1 (2012): 26–31. 
 38. Edward Glaeser, “Paternalism and Psychology,”  University of Chicago 
Law Review 73 (2006): 133–156, at 135. 
 39. This was the focus of Dan Ariely’s follow-up to  Predictably Irrational 
(see note 14), titled  The Upside of Irrationality :  The Unexpected 
Benefi ts of Defying Logic at Work and at Home (New York: Harper, 
2010). 
36 
M.D. WHITE
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

37
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_3
 The Four Pillars of Behavioral 
Paternalism 
 Mario   J.   Rizzo 
 In the past 15 years there has been a great deal of discussion, both scholarly 
and popular, about behavioral economics, irrationality, and “new paternal-
ism.” But to my knowledge, no one has clearly presented the  structure 
of the argument that links the failure of individuals to be rational in the 
standard economics sense to the desirability of paternalist policies. The 
purpose of this article is to fi ll that gap and to demonstrate the inability 
(thus far) of paternalists to make their case. 
 I shall organize the discussion around four propositions that must be 
advanced in order to make the overall argument for new paternalism based 
on behavioral economics. Each proposition is necessary to make the pater-
nalist case. The failure to demonstrate any one of the propositions breaks 
the link, and at that point, the argument is lost. While initially some read-
ers may think that this requirement is too stringent, careful consideration 
of the logical steps involved will show that this is not the case. The advo-
cates of new paternalism, both scholarly and popular, have incorrectly led 
many to believe that the case is far simpler than it really is. In fact, there 
are many complexities that are often overlooked. 
 M. J.  Rizzo () 
 New York University ,  New York ,  NY ,  USA 
 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 These are the four propositions or pillars on which the case for new 
paternalism rests.
 1.  There is a set of general normative criteria for “rational” or welfare- 
increasing behavior, with respect to both judgment and preferences. 
 2.  Real-world behavior signifi cantly departs from these criteria. 
 3.  Policymakers have the ability to craft policies that move people toward 
more welfare-enhancing behavior. 
 4.  Policies can be carried out without unacceptably high costs in either 
welfare or freedom. 
 The fi rst proposition is the heart of the entire case. Without a set a 
normatively persuasive criteria for rational behavior, neither cognitive nor 
preference biases can be defi ned and established. We shall see that both 
behavioral and standard economics have misconstrued the rationality axioms 
of economics. This misconstrual has elevated technical norms into prescrip-
tive norms. The second proposition must be maintained by the behavioral 
paternalist to make the case for policy intervention in principle. However, 
from the perspective I am advancing, this may or may not be important. 
Even assuming the abstract persuasiveness of norms, the question to ask 
is: Do they apply in the real world? If not, then empirical violations—to 
the extent they occur—are not important from the perspective of the real-
world agent. The third proposition is critical but often overlooked in simpli-
fi ed stories of irrational behavior and their possible remedies. In a world of 
complex and interacting biases whose general quantitative magnitudes are 
unclear, crafting effi cacious policy is no simple matter. The fourth proposi-
tion relates to the claims made by behavioral paternalists that their policies 
are mild or moderate, requiring only “nudges” or other soft inducements. 
But these claims are belied by the arguments of other behavioral economists 
that nudges are not enough. They are also belied by the inherent expansive 
potential of policies in a world where benchmarks are ambiguous. 
 As the reader can see,  each of the propositions is necessary to make 
the case. I could stop the analysis after showing that any one of them has 
not been adequately supported. Nevertheless, the full force of the anti- 
paternalist case cannot be seen without covering the entire ground. It is 
also important to understand that we are not dealing with the normative 
desirability of new paternalism per se. We are making an “impossibility” 
claim. If a policy framework is neither coherent nor possible, it cannot be 
desirable. Ought presupposes can. 
38 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 PILLAR ONE: NORMATIVE CRITERIA 
 Behavioral economics starts from the assumption that the real-world indi-
vidual is, in essence, a neoclassical agent who is predictably and system-
atically disturbed by psychological shocks (Bernheim and Rangel  2007 ). 
In the absence of these shocks, all of the standard axioms about prefer-
ences and judgments would be correct. For example, agents would have 
complete, transitive, and stationary preferences. In conditions of uncer-
tainty modeled as risk, they would be expected utility maximizers and 
they would learn about the world through Bayesian updating. This basic 
assumption is not an empirical conclusion. It is a maintained, nonfalsifi -
able core proposition that provides a framework for analysis. It is part of 
a research program (Lakatos  1970 ). In this research program, anything 
that systematically interferes with the “normative” operation of the agent 
is construed as a psychological shock, and therefore, in a technical sense, 
a “bias.” 
 The proposition that in the absence of psychological shocks the indi-
vidual would exhibit neoclassical rationality characteristics is also treated, 
perhaps oddly, as a normative proposition. These are the characteristics 
the individual  should have (Whitman and Rizzo  2015 ). 1 Not surprisingly 
there appears to be some resistance to saying this outright in plain lan-
guage since the normatively required characteristics, as we shall see, are 
not persuasive. Nevertheless, it is the inconsistencies of choice as well as 
other rationality violations that “can justify the need for paternalistic poli-
cies” (Camerer et al.  2003 , 1218). The aim of paternalistic policies is to 
create “‘as if’ rationality” (Sunstein  2014 , 154). The logic of behavioral 
economics is that in the absence of violations of standard rationality there 
is no “decision-making failure” and no need for public policies aside from 
the ones often inferred from standard economics (e.g., externalities, pub-
lic goods, monopoly, and, in some cases, inadequate information). 
 Nevertheless, the norms with respect to which shocks and biases are 
defi ned are not what most people, including economists, think they are. 
They are not, at least in the fi rst instance,  prescriptive standards. To clarify 
this claim I refer to a distinction made by the philosopher, John Searle 
( 1969 ). There are two kinds of norms: constitutive and prescriptive. 
Constitutive norms refer to the rules of the game or endeavor. Think of 
playing chess. There are rules that constitute the game of chess. At some 
point, violation of these rules is not playing chess badly, it is not playing 
chess. We can take standard chess pieces and play by the rules of checkers. 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 39
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

No one would say simply that we are playing chess badly. On the other 
hand, a driver who violates traffi c rules on a road is still driving but he is 
driving poorly. The poorness of his driving is likely to put either his own 
safety or that of others at risk. A case can be made for reforming his driv-
ing. The traffi c rules are prescriptive norms. In the fi rst case, it is not clear 
at all that not playing chess is a bad thing. It might be if the individual’s 
well-being depended on it—say, if he were involved in a tournament in 
which he stood to make a great deal of money. But the case would have 
to be made. 
 Analogously, the norms of economic rationality are constitutive norms. 
 If you want to be rational in a technical sense, you must obey the standard 
axioms of rationality. And that is it. 
 The rationality axioms were originally developed to give a fi rm logi-
cal foundation to the utility-function construct. As part of the attempt 
to rid economics of the hedonic psychology that was associated with the 
term “utility” and to clarify just how minimal the necessary assumptions 
for utility-function analysis were, a set of rationality axioms was devel-
oped (Mas-Colell et al.  1995 ). From these (completeness and transitivity 
of preference ordering were the main ones), the economist could derive 
a utility function that would summarize the preferences an agent might 
have. This is the logical foundation of a key economics construct. The util-
ity function, in turn, is the core of economic models that explain aggre-
gate behavior. The preference axioms thus became the constitutive norms 
of economic models and rationality. Unfortunately, certain ambiguities 
appeared right at the outset. In the hands of “welfare economics,” it was 
asserted that, on the basis of these norms, the impact of policy on the 
welfare of agents could be determined. What was missed was the proviso 
that  if agents behaved in accordance with the axioms, then their welfare 
could be assessed in relation to the axioms. There was no defended claim 
that agents  should behave in accordance with the axioms. 
 Later, some economists tried to show that if people did not behave 
in accordance with the transitivity axiom they would be vulnerable to a 
money pump (Tullock  1964 ). This is a variant of the so-called Dutch book 
argument. An alert agent would—somehow—notice that an “irrational” 
individual had the following preference ordering:  A is preferred to  B ,  B 
is preferred to  C , but  C is preferred to  A . Let an individual be in  possession 
of  C . The Dutch bookie offers him  B if he will pay  C  + ε.  The individ-
ual accepts. Then the bookie offers  A in exchange for  B  + ε. Again the 
individual accepts. At this point, noticing the intransitive  preferences, the 
40 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

bookie offers  C in exchange for  A  + ε. Our irrational fellow accepts and is 
back where he started from but missing 3ε. If this process is continued a 
“suffi cient” number of times, the individual will be out of resources and 
effectively out of economic existence. 
 In one sense, the money-pump argument is too good. It effectively 
bans such individuals from existence. And yet, at least according to experi-
mental research, such people seem to exist. But the argument also pre-
supposes that the agent not only has intransitive preferences but also is 
oblivious to the money pump. After the fi rst complete round, he appar-
ently still does not see what is going on. To succeed, the Dutch bookie 
would have to be facing not only a person with intransitive preferences but 
a person with an extreme case of myopia. The individual does not see that, 
in effect, the separate offers are really just one offer: You give me  C plus 
3ε and I will give you  C . This is not all. To what does the abstract Dutch 
bookie correspond in the real world? Suppose I have intransitive pair-wise 
preferences among three people I might date. Is the Dutch bookie sup-
posed to be some malevolent character who wishes to rid me of my date 
money? Suppose I have intransitive preferences among products in a store. 
Does the store owner money-pump me? If so, do I go back? 2 
 Of course, it is possible in principle to construct examples in which 
behaving contrary to the standard rationality axioms produces bad results 
from the point of view of the agent. In those cases, the constitutive norms 
would also be prescriptive norms. The point is that  one would have to make 
the case that behaving in a specifi c way in a specifi c environment reduces the 
welfare of the agent as he sees it . 
 Before concluding this section, it will be useful to examine a little more 
carefully the kinds of perfectly reasonable behavior that give rise to viola-
tions of the constitutive norms of standard economics. While these illus-
trations do not demonstrate that all violations must be reasonable, they do 
demonstrate that the axioms are not necessary conditions for reasonable 
purpose-enhancing—or at least not self-defeating—behavior.  3 
 Violation of Completeness 
 To be “rational” the agent must be able to completely order the options 
he faces before any choices are made. There must be a complete preor-
dering of the preference fi eld. This means that an agent who simply does 
not know or is not sure if he prefers  A to  B does not behave as a rational 
agent. 4 Complete self-awareness in the form of internal omniscience is a 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 41
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

requirement of rationality. It should be clear, however, that this require-
ment is entirely derived from its necessity in constructing a standard utility 
function. But utility function analysis, convenient though it may be, is not 
the only way to think of making choices. The individual can follow heuris-
tics or rules. For example, in intertemporal choice if an individual cannot 
adequately distinguish the subjective value of consuming $50 today from 
the subjective value of consuming $55 in six months, he may use a heu-
ristic like choosing the option that is sooner or the option that is greater 
in amount (Manzini and Mariotti  2006 ). An individual following such a 
heuristic is purposeful, consistent, and rational in any broad meaning of 
the word. There is nothing here to repair or to call a bias. 5 
 Violation of Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives 
 Another important criterion of economic rationality is that expression of 
preferences is independent of “irrelevant alternatives.” This is closely con-
nected with the idea that the framing of an option should not matter. If 
an individual preferred  A over  B when both were available, she ought not 
to prefer  B over  A when  C is also available. 6 Pair-wise preferences cannot 
be reversed by expansion (or contraction) of the preference set. This is 
because, by assumption, the set of options itself cannot convey information 
that might change behavior. The axiom explicitly excludes that possibility. 
 To see how easily this is violated, consider a polite conservative lady who 
has not seen a relative for a long time and has been invited to tea (Sen 
 1993 ). Initially, she is posed with the simple option of going to tea ( A ) or 
not going to tea ( B ). Her preference is to go to tea. Now the invitation 
is elaborated. She is offered the options of going to tea, going to smoke 
cocaine with the relative ( C ), or not going at all. She decides not to visit the 
relative at all. Why? The answer is that, contrary to the axiom, the additional 
option conveys information about the kind of person her long- lost relative 
really is. If he would want to smoke cocaine, then she doesn’t even want 
to have tea with him. This is no doubt reasonable. Examples such as these 
make obvious that the rationality of preference ordering is a different kind 
of rationality than we would normally uphold as a prescriptive standard. 7 
 Violation of Transitivity 
 Transitivity of preferences is sometimes thought of as akin to transitivity of 
propositions in logic, but it is not. We must distinguish the transitivity of 
42 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

preference from the transitivity of logical implication (Read  1995 , 251). 
An example of the latter is the syllogism:  From “ if A then B ”  and “ if B then 
C ”  then we can infer “ if A then C. ” Note that the consequent of each step 
in this chain is used as the antecedent in the next step. This is the “transi-
tivity of proof.” In contrast, the relation of preference is not a logical one 
(“if  A then  B ”) but an evaluative one (“ x is at least as good as  y ”). Whether 
an evaluative chain is transitive depends on the basis of the evaluation. 
 Again, a violation of the transitivity of preferences is easy to produce. 
A person is presented with a bowl of three pieces of fruit: a large apple, 
a small apple, and an orange. Her order of preferences is: A large apple 
is preferred to an orange; an orange is preferred to a small apple. So as 
between a large apple and a small apple she should prefer the large apple. 
However, the host presents her with a choice between a large apple and 
a small apple. She chooses the small apple. Why? Because she considers 
it impolite to take the bigger of the two apples presented to her. Old- 
fashioned manners are clearly not irrational in any reasonable prescriptive 
sense. 
 While the above examples of axiom violations may seem trivial, they 
illustrate a nontrivial point. The axioms of rationality in standard econom-
ics are not prescriptive; they are constitutive of a certain kind of behavior 
that is useful for technical purposes. 
 Axiom Violations and Arbitrary Norms 
 It is one thing to show that behavior violates one of the axioms of rational 
choice; it is quite another to decide what better behavior would be. To see 
this, let us explore the implicit axiom of stationarity that underlies most of 
the normative literature on intertemporal choice. The standard neoclassi-
cal agent applies a single discount rate to all of the future fl ows of income 
that he can choose among regardless of when they occur. Thus, if he just 
barely prefers the option of $100 today to $105 in one year, he will also 
just barely prefer the option of $100 in three years to $105 in four years. 8 
The discount rate is independent of when the one-year delay occurs. It is 
well known that there are many violations of the axiom (Read  2004 ). 
 One of the most interesting violations, from the perspective of behav-
ioral economics, is what is misleadingly called “preference reversal.” 
Consider again the individual above. He prefers $100 today to $105 a 
year from now. But in our revised story, he also prefers $105 in four years 
to $100  in three years. He is time inconsistent. The second delay—in 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 43
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

the farther future—is not discounted by the same amount. The individual 
appears less impatient with respect to the second option than the fi rst. In 
itself this might be thought of as a curiosity or as a technical problem. 
However, behavioral economists have interpreted the phenomenon in a 
special way that makes it appear to be a kind of substantive irrationality. 
The fi rst decision is often viewed as indicative of a present bias rooted in 
transient psychological states or defects. While almost all of the experimen-
tal evidence on preference reversal relates to hypothetical choices about 
money, some of the interpretations are more like this: A very hungry indi-
vidual is faced with an attractive steak now or a multicourse fancy dinner 
tomorrow. He cannot control his urges so he grabs the steak now. On the 
other hand, if the same individual is faced with the option of a steak in 
three months when hungry or a multicourse fancy dinner in three month 
and a day, he may choose the later, better meal. He will say I can con-
trol my hunger then and wait a day. The implication of this (not directly 
tested) is that when three months have elapsed and the future becomes 
the present, he will switch and grab the steak. Here it is visceral factors 
that explain the present bias (Loewenstein  1996 , 272–292). Similar argu-
ments—though not visceral in nature—have been made about why people 
plan to save but then do not. The new clothes in the store on payday are 
just too tempting. 9 
 The implicit assumption being made is that the immediate decision is 
contaminated by some sort of psychological distortion while the decision 
for the farther future is being made rationally and without distortion. As 
plausible as this may seem, it is not supported by any fair reading of the 
full range of literature on temporal discounting. No rate of discounting—
immediate or long-run—is free from either affective or cognitive infl u-
ences. Let us assume for the moment that the psychological state that 
impels present consumption is a distortion relative to some ideal. So we 
shall, for the sake of argument, label the earlier, higher rate of discount 
affectively biased. What about the second, lower rate of discount? 
 We must take a small detour on how the farther future tends to be 
envisioned by human beings. The passage of a given amount of calendar 
time (one month, one year, and so forth) is not always  perceived as being 
of the same length. For example, a year is not perceived as the equivalent 
of four three-month periods. From a psychological perspective, the fi rst 
three-month segment is longer than one quarter of a year. The rest of the 
year gets compressed relative to the fi rst segment. As the agent looks to 
the farther future, the passage of calendar time is increasingly compressed. 
44 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Delays will appear to be shorter. The individual will have to be paid less for 
waiting a given amount of calendar time in the more distant future. Thus, 
a lower and lower discount rate will be applied to the successive periods. 
 From the perspective of behavioral economics, this would be consid-
ered a cognitive bias. Recall that the normative standard applied by behav-
ioralists is the neoclassical ideal. Neoclassical man is a creature who lives 
solely in calendar time. For that reason alone, the second, later discount 
rate is “contaminated.” It is too low. 10 
 In another related approach, Read ( 2001 ) has shown that intertem-
poral choices are subadditive. This means that the average compounded 
discount rates applied over short segments are higher than the rate applied 
over a long segment. In our example above, the individual appears to be 
less impatient in the choice of $105 in four years over $100 in three years. 
But take the delay between the present and three years and divide it into 
smaller intervals or segments (say, of three or six months each). The aver-
age of the individual shorter interval discount rates will be higher—often 
signifi cantly—than the discount rate applied to the undivided full inter-
val. 11 Thus, the discounting of the smaller, sooner reward (in the second 
option) will be greater. In the typical case, the preference reversal will 
disappear. A proposed psychological basis for this is that the salience of 
the events over shorter intervals is greater than that over longer intervals. 
Thus, the value of what is being sacrifi ced by delay  is seen more precisely . 
Discount rates go up. Unless behavioral economists want to argue that less 
salience is normative, it is hard to escape the conclusion that—as usually 
measured—long-term discount rates are too low relative to omniscience. 
From this it follows that the divergence of discount rates and preference 
reversal is not the simple temptation-cool planning phenomenon it is 
alleged to be. All discount rates are “distorted” relative to omniscience. 
The behavioral economist has no good reason for choosing the long-run 
rate as the uniquely normative one. 
 PILLAR TWO: REAL-WORLD BEHAVIOR 
 The purpose of this section is not to contest that there are many violations 
of the standard rationality axioms in the real world. My point is that we 
should never have expected the real world to behave in accordance with 
those axioms. 12 Indeed Leonard Savage ( 1954 ), who had a signifi cant role 
in developing the axiomatic approach in economics, made a useful distinc-
tion between small worlds and large worlds. Only the former have clearly 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 45
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

defi ned options with defi nite probabilities. Large worlds, on the other 
hand, are characterized by ambiguity, imprecision, and true uncertainty 
rather than risk. The standard rationality axioms make sense only in a 
closed, carefully circumscribed, and delimited small world. 13 An agent act-
ing like neoclassical man in a large world would be acting irrationally. He 
would not be adapted to his environment; he would not be ecologically 
rational. 14 
 Standard economics is fi lled with analyses of optimal courses of action. 
This of course can make perfect sense in a small world where if there is 
“uncertainty” it is purely risk. The future may not be known but its sto-
chastic structure is or, at least, the agent has some stochastic structure in 
mind. So (subjective) expected utility maximization is the way to go. In 
my view, economists have overinvested in this form of analysis. In large 
worlds people use fast and frugal heuristics to make judgments and choices 
(e.g., Gigerenzer  2008 ). Heuristics are shortcuts. They economize on the 
use of data and actually suppress the consideration of certain factors. They 
are not used because people are stupid—and not only because people are 
“boundedly rational.” In fact, they can yield the best results in a particular 
environment. 
 Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman ( 1974 , 1124–1131) created a 
“heuristics and biases” literature that is quite different from the ecological 
rationality framework of Gerd Gigerenzer. Heuristics and biases are the 
basis of most behavioral economics. For the behavioralists the main issue 
is the cognitive limitations of the human mind. As we have seen above, 
behavioral economists believe that (a) the real-world individual is basically 
a neoclassical agent who is disturbed by psychological shocks and (b) the 
normative standard for his behavior is technical rationality. Therefore, in 
this view, heuristics are necessarily inferior instruments in dealing with the 
world. Since, however, the errors made by using heuristics are system-
atic and predictable to the behavioral analyst (although not to the agent), 
there is the possibility that decision-making can be improved by informed 
policy interventions. Unfortunately, these conclusions rest on the unsup-
ported idea that the environment in which people act is the equivalent 
of Savage’s small world. All of the relevant data for optimal or rational 
decision-making is allegedly out there but boundedly rational people can-
not see it or process it, or act in accordance with it. 
 This analysis is seriously incomplete and one-sided. Herbert Simon 
( 1990 , 7) believed that human rationality “was shaped by scissors whose 
two blades are the structure of the task environment and the computational 
46 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

capabilities of the actor.” In their appropriate environments heuristics are 
not only an economical way to make judgments and decisions, but they 
are also more successful than trying to use small-world decision-making 
techniques. For example, instead of engaging in complex and expensive 
optimization of an investment portfolio, a simple rule of allocating funds 
equally across  n standard mutual funds outperformed almost all of 15 
other strategies. But more signifi cantly, no other single strategy could con-
sistently outperform the 1/n rule (DeMiguel, Garlappi and Uppal  2009 ). 
 Take-the-best (TTB) is another heuristic that has been used for tasks 
that involve identifying properties of a particular object: which city has 
the higher population, which fi rm has the highest profi t prospects, which 
of two suspects is more likely to have committed a murder, and so forth. 
This heuristic requires the decision-maker to choose cues (characteristics), 
rank them in order of their perceived validity, and then check off if the 
candidate object satisfi es the cue or not. The heuristic is lexicographic so 
as the decision-maker goes down the list of cues the fi rst object to satisfy 
a cue while the others do not is chosen. For example, if we are trying to 
fi nd out which of two cities has the greater population, we might check if 
the city is the capital of the country. If neither, we go to the second cue: 
Does it have a soccer team? If A does and B does not, we choose A. If both 
(or neither) have one, we go on to the third cue. The fi rst time either A 
or B has the characteristic and the other does not, we stop and choose the 
one that has it. In a competition with standard “integration strategies” 
like multiple regression analysis, TTB was superior to all the others in this 
population task (Gigerenzer and Goldstein  1996 ). 
 This does not mean that TTB is a superior decision-making method for 
all problems. It is a context-specifi c tool that economizes on information 
and cognitive effort. Accordingly, people do not always use the heuristic 
but in many environments where it is appropriate they do. This appro-
priateness depends not only on the cognitive limitations of the individual 
but also on the structure of the environment. For example, even when 
people experienced a  reduction in cognitive load, they did not shift away 
from TTB to more complex strategies (Bröder  2012 ). In fact, the effect of 
high cognitive load was to prevent people from moving away from a more 
complex strategy when it was inferior to TTB. Thus the idea that heuris-
tics are less effective ways of coping with the environment than various 
optimizing strategies is incorrect. In an environment that does not satisfy 
the small-world criteria, heuristics can be a better instrument. Under such 
circumstances, the greater the individuals’ cognitive capacity, the more 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 47
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

heuristics will be used. We should not regret that individuals do not satisfy 
the standard rationality requirements of economic theory. 
 PILLAR THREE: THE KNOWLEDGE DEMANDS OF POLICY 15 
 The purpose of a new paternalist policy is to bring out the inner neo-
classical agent. 16 To accomplish this, the policymaker must fi rst uncover 
people’s “true preferences.” These are the preferences individuals would 
have if they were not subject to psychological distortions such as imperfect 
computational ability, imperfect appreciation of information, and no lack 
of willpower (Thaler and Sunstein  2003 , 175). 
 The purpose of this section is to ask whether the fi ndings of behavioral 
psychology and economics are suffi ciently robust and precise to serve as a 
basis for policy. Keeping in mind that the fundamental policy requirement 
of new paternalism is to enhance the individual’s satisfaction of her true 
preferences, the task is not simply changing behavior. It is changing behav-
ior relative to a particular standard. Sometimes this is ignored or down-
played, as when a certain activity—say, smoking—is socially disapproved. 
Other times as when there is discussion of proper diet and nutrition for 
young children, parents presumably do not care about the children’s true 
preferences. Parents may simply want to act as “old paternalists” in what 
 they perceive to be the children’s best interests. Nevertheless, what is sup-
posed to be unique about new paternalism is that it rests on the identifi ca-
tion of what individuals want—down deep. 
 Let us take the case of “undersaving.” People claim that they would like 
to save more. Many behavioral economists believe them. 17 However, behav-
ioral economists must know to what extent people are saving less because 
of  present bias or time-inconsistent impatience . Time-consistent impatience 
is just the ordinary, normatively “legitimate” expression of time preference 
between consumption today and consumption in the future. There is noth-
ing irrational about that. Present bias, on the other hand, is the application 
of a higher discount rate in the short term than in the longer term. It can 
result in the abandonment of savings plans as the future becomes the pres-
ent. For example, suppose an individual planned to save $100 next month 
in exchange for a return of $110 in one month and a year. And yet today 
when faced with the opportunity to sacrifi ce $100 today for $110 a year 
from now, he chooses the $100 today. The same time delay is being priced 
differently (inconsistently) for the nearer future than for the more distant 
future. This is incompatible with the standard rationality axioms. 18 
48 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Suppose a policymaker wanted to make savings more attractive in order 
to offset present bias. He could propose a tax on consumption or a sub-
sidy on savings. How much should it be? He would have to know, not 
simply that people have present bias, but the quantitative extent of that 
bias. This requires that he distinguish between ordinary time-consistent 
impatience and present bias. Too high a subsidy must be avoided because 
it could result in welfare losses that are just as great (or even greater) 
due to oversaving. The problem is that empirical estimates of discount 
rates have an extraordinarily high variance. There is a “spectacular dis-
agreement among dozens of studies” (Frederick et al.  2002 , 389) and 
“sometimes even within studies” (393). The following graphic shows the 
variation in the measurements of discount factors by the year of their 
publication (Fig.  1 ). 19 
 While it is not possible to go into details here, it is quite clear that mea-
sured discount rates vary as a result of (Weatherly  2014 ):
 1.  The method of elicitation. Three of the most common methods are to 
require individuals to make binary choices, multiple choices, or to fi ll 
in the blank. Different rates of impatience are found for each. The 
binary choice method, for example, usually reveals greater impatience 
than the others. 
 2.  How the outcomes are framed. Is the intertemporal option framed as 
money won or as money owed? Money owed is less heavily discounted, 
sometimes signifi cantly. 
 Fig. 1  Discount Factor by Year of Study Publication (Source: Frederick et al. 
( 2002 , 380)) 
 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 49
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 3.  Magnitude effects. Holding time delays constant, the greater the mag-
nitudes involved, the less heavily people discount the future. In other 
words, as the amounts at stake at all time periods become more signifi -
cant, people become less impatient. 
 4.  Money versus other outcomes. It appears that people discount money 
options differently from, say, health options. There is more discounting 
in the money case. 
 Perhaps the most serious of these problems is the elicitation method 
since there does not seem to be a good theoretical reason to choose one 
over the others. 
 The difference in measured discounted rates gets compounded because 
the effect on conventionally determined welfare can be magnifi ed. For 
example, in a study of “optimal sin taxes,” that is, taxes on products or 
activities that paternalists believe are not good for people, there is an enor-
mous variation in the policy prescriptions depending on smaller variations 
in measured discount rates. The point is rather striking:
 If half of the population is fully self-controlled while the other half of the 
population has a very small present bias of … 0.99, then the optimal tax is 
5.15 %. If instead the half of the population with self-control problems has 
a somewhat larger present bias of … 0.90 – which is still a smaller present 
bias … than is often discussed in the literature – the optimal tax is 63.71 %. 
(O’Donoghue and Rabin  2006 , 1838) 20 
 This and similar considerations are very signifi cant for the determina-
tion of whether paternalist policies will make things better or worse from 
the perspective of helping people satisfy their true preferences. I stress 
that too high a tax can be worse, in this view, than no tax at all. Even if 
the policy is not to formulate a sin tax but to construct a “nudge” toward 
more savings—say, making automatic enrollment the default in the case of 
employer-sponsored retirement plans—these problems of estimation are 
important. How do we know when the nudge is enough? 21 What is the 
measure of success? 
 Before concluding this section, I would like to briefl y analyze another 
important diffi culty for paternalist policy that arises out of the multiplicity 
of interacting biases. In the discussion above about oversaving I assumed 
that the only relevant bias was the overvaluation in immediate decisions 
of present consumption. However, behavioral economists also claim that 
50 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

individuals overestimate their  future consumption needs (Rabin  1999 ). 
Clearly, these biases move in opposite directions. The fi rst can lead to 
undersaving while the second can lead to oversaving. Corrective policy 
would need reasonably accurate quantitative estimates of the two confl ict-
ing biases. The data on discounting is quite unreliable as we have seen. I 
do not know of reliable quantitative estimates of overestimation bias. 
 There are also the alarming and vivid commercials about the health 
effects of cigarette smoking. These supposedly exist because certain biases 
restrict the effects of informational advertising and because risk narratives 
like these commercials elicit a further offsetting bias. The argument goes 
like this: If we were simply to give people information of the dangers of 
smoking, they would probably not fully absorb this information due to 
lack of full attention. Furthermore, people are victims of “optimism bias,” 
whereby they accept the scientifi c information about the probabilities of a 
bad health outcome but believe that they are “magically” protected from 
these effects. To offset this, frightening narratives can be presented, which 
take advantage of people’s “availability bias”—the effect of vivid, present 
events (like plane crashes) on exaggerating the likelihood of the particular 
danger involved. Thus, the behavioralist seeks to fi ght one set of biases 
with another. However, the problem is more complex. Cigarette smok-
ers, even before all of the advertising of this nature, believed that ciga-
rette smoking is more dangerous than it really is (Antoñanzas et al.  2000 ; 
Viscusi  1990 ). 22 
 To determine whether risk narratives improve welfare in the behav-
ioral calculation requires quantitative knowledge beyond what is avail-
able. First, the analyst needs to know the extent to which inattention and 
optimism bias result in people thinking cigarette smoking is safer than it 
really is. Second, that must be quantitatively counterbalanced by the belief 
that cigarette smoking is more dangerous than it really is in order to get 
the appropriate  perceived probability of health risks. Third, then we must 
determine how much availability bias enhances the perception of risk—
assuming of course that the target audience is suitably attentive to the risk 
narratives. At this point, the analyst would be able to ascertain the result-
ing perceived probability of harm. If this is correct (i.e., equal to the true 
probabilities), then the individual would be able to correctly determine 
the optimal course of action: to smoke or not to smoke. 
 Behavioral economists have not come to terms with this kind of prob-
lem. But they must. Recall that what is unique about behavioral paternal-
ism—new paternalism—is that the standard of making individuals “better 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 51
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

off” is the  true preferences of the individuals themselves . Since smoking has 
obvious benefi ts, the optimal amount of smoking is not zero in a diverse 
population. This cost-benefi t calculation is complicated since even behav-
ioral economists allow that consistent impatience, rather than present bias, 
is allowable in intertemporal decisions (smoking pleasure today versus 
possible health consequences later). 
 In the actual world of policymaking, however, the behavioral criterion 
does not matter. As the examples of sin taxes and risk narrative show, the 
measure of success for behavioral economists is elusive. So the practical 
standard of success will be the (nonoptimal) obliteration of the suspect 
activity. This sets part of the stage for the fi nal pillar of paternalism. 
 PILLAR FOUR: “UNINTENDED” COSTS OF POLICY 
EXPANSION 23 
 It is often diffi cult to say whether certain outcomes are intended or not. 
Policies are usually advocated by many people with different agendas. I do 
not doubt that this is true about new paternalist policies. Some advocates 
may welcome the transformation of soft policies into harder policies. For 
my purposes here what is important are the claims made by certain of the 
advocates. Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein ( 2008 ) in particular have 
pushed the point that they advocate only soft interventions—nudges.  The 
Economist referred to new paternalist policies as embodying the “avuncu-
lar state” in contrast to the more severe “paternalist state” (April 6, 2006). 
In this respect, Thaler and Sunstein are tacitly admitting that certain types 
of highly restrictive government intervention may be undesirable. This is 
especially evident in Sunstein’s more recent book  Why Nudge ? ( 2014 ). 24 
 Not all new paternalists are so reluctant. George Loewenstein and 
Peter Ubel ( 2010 ) have argued that nudges are not strong enough. In 
general they are insuffi cient to effect the appropriate change in behavior. 
For example, they argue that the real problem underlying obesity is not 
lack of information. Less healthful and processed foods have fallen in rela-
tive price. This is a powerful incentive to consume them. Calorie post-
ings are too puny a policy tool. They claim government needs to consider 
taxes. This more expansive approach also gains traction from the problem 
we discussed in the previous section. When success or failure of a policy 
is diffi cult to ascertain empirically (even if its theoretical standard were 
clear), there is a special opportunity to push out the range of restrictions. 
This is in part because the public thinks in dichotomous terms—obesity 
52 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

is bad, smoking is bad; ideally, there should be none of each. Policy can 
easily fail because the optimum amount of a suspect activity is practically 
unobservable and is probably not meaningful to the public in any event. 
 From the perspective of behavioral economics, if ordinary people are 
subject to biases—say, present bias—it is hard to see that policymakers 
would not also be. It is therefore instructive to explore the effect of pres-
ent bias in the political process. Most public choice economists agree 
that the incentives of the political system are such that rational, unbiased 
actors will be focused on policies that promise short-term gains even at 
the expense of greater long-term costs. In the fi rst place, unless there are 
short-term gains the politician is not likely to be around for the long run. 
Secondly, most politicians are not in fact around for the long run and 
by that time the public is likely to have forgotten which policy caused 
which outcomes. Atop all of this is the effect of policymaker present bias 
and time-inconsistent planning. To illustrate, consider a sin tax on foods 
that are high in fat, salt, sugar, or other refi ned carbohydrates. Paternalists 
usually fi nd that consumption of these foods is excessive. Recall that the 
excess consumption is not due to time-consistent impatience but to the 
extra kick of present bias. Thus, a paternalist who takes “a careful, cau-
tious, and disciplined approach” (Camerer et al.  2003 , 1212) will want, 
as best he can, to limit the tax to offsetting present bias and not more. 
Such a tax will lead the individual to incorporate in the upfront costs of 
consumption the “correct” (unbiased) present value of the future health 
risks. Ideally, the present bias problem will then be solved; people will, on 
average, consume the optimal amount of junk food. However, paternalists 
are not the only actors in the political system. There are those who want 
additional tax money to support whatever their projects are. Having estab-
lished a sin tax on food, the mechanisms are all in place and the public is 
acclimated to their existence. 25 
 Let us assume that the paternalist policymaker is aware of all this. He 
sees the threat of expansion. He is determined to resist the hijacking of 
the policy for other purposes that will also reduce the welfare of the now 
optimally controlled consumer by reducing consumption still further. The 
future possibility now becomes a present possibility. How does a present- 
biased paternalist react? He sees the cost of decreased welfare because 
consumers will not be able to optimally enjoy junk food. But he exces-
sively discounts these costs at the moment of his promised resistance. 
Oh well, it is not so bad—he tells himself—it is better to conserve politi-
cal resources for use in some other area of paternalist policy advocacy or 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 53
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

implementation. This phenomenon is exacerbated by the fact that there is 
no bright- line rule, no clear optimum that can act as at least a conceptual 
bulwark against sliding into unintended expanded policies. 
 Even without biases on the part of policymakers, the policy discussed 
above has expansionary potential. One of the leading behavioral justifi ca-
tions for junk-food taxes is consumer myopia in various forms. Present 
bias is just one form of this phenomenon. Another is the failure to look at 
circumstances in a wide-enough frame of reference. When a tax is placed 
on foods with high refi ned sugar content or other foods deemed to con-
tribute to the obesity, people will adjust presumably by eating less of this 
food. But they also may adjust by engaging in less exercise like walking or 
by not restricting by as much the quantity of food they eat. There are many 
personal inputs into the overall objective of weight control. The policy only 
targets one of them. Since, by assumption, people have not changed their 
overall weight objectives, it is quite plausible that they will perceive lower 
consumption of sugary drinks as “permission” to eat more or exercise less. 
This reaction will offset, to some degree at least, the initial effect of the fat 
tax. However, myopic individuals focus more on subgoals (eating more 
healthily) and less on superordinate goals (losing weight) (Fishbach et al. 
 2006 ). 26 Progress toward the satisfaction of a subgoal can cause people to 
disengage from the overall picture of controlling weight and thus induce 
a reduction in  all of the inputs into weight control.  27 This may result 
in even less exercise or portion control than in the case without biases. 
Therefore, initial tax rates on sugary foods are fairly certain to rise because 
these adjustments will make the previous policy inadequate. The more 
myopically biased individuals are, the more substantial will be this effect. 
 The fi nal expansionary tendency in new paternalism that I wish to discuss 
here is not a quantitative issue but a qualitative one. Behavioral  economists 
have a peculiar relationship with information. One of the obstacles to fully 
rational choice is supposedly incomplete information (Thaler and Sunstein 
 2003 , 175). However, economists in the rational choice tradition have 
incorporated incomplete information in their models for many decades 
without jeopardizing the rationality of the agents. As we have seen, behav-
ioral economists fi nd that there are obstacles to the full appreciation or 
absorption of information even where in some sense it may be complete. 
Some philosophers, even before the development of behavioral economics, 
have argued that, for an individual to be completely informed, the infor-
mation must be the focus of attention, maximally vivid, and there must be 
no doubt about its truth (Brandt  1979 , 111–112). This requirement raises 
54 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

some important issues. Just as complete information about the dangers or 
risks of one activity may not be properly absorbed (as in the case of simple 
declarative warnings about cigarette smoking), so too information that is 
too vivid or too much the focus of attention might not be properly pro-
cessed. Sunstein and Thaler ( 2003 , 1183) claimed: “In the face of health 
risks, for example, some presentations of accurate information might actu-
ally be counterproductive because people might attempt to control their 
fear by refusing to think about the risk at all.” This type of argument has 
been used to question whether people can be trusted to properly absorb, 
process, or utilize information about the relative risks of different products. 
 Recently a manufacturer of smokeless tobacco products petitioned 
the FDA for a modifi cation of the required warning label on its product 
“snus.” Swedish Match AB wanted at least part of the label to read that its 
product carries “substantially lower risks to health than cigarettes.” 28 The 
FDA Advisory Panel rejected the petition. In an article reporting this  The 
New York Times said “One big worry is whether labels that indicate lower 
risk may tempt people, particularly young people, to use tobacco prod-
ucts that they might not have tried otherwise” (Tavernise  2015 ). In an 
editorial on the same subject, the  Times further claimed that “snus might 
lead some nonsmokers to take up the nicotine habit, and progress on to 
cigarette smoking, when abstention would be the safest approach” (NYT, 
April 23,  2015 ). This argument is made despite the fact that “most pan-
elists agreed that snus appears less harmful than cigarettes when used by 
smokers who switch” (Clarke  2015 ). 
 This development should be troubling from an ethical and legal perspec-
tive. The infl uence of behavioral psychology on policy has created a gradient 
from the inadequacy of simple truthful disclosure to the  inappropriateness 
of truthful disclosure. Statements of facts which are true can be forbid-
den on labels, even though they are of obvious relevance to consumers. It 
appears that the operative criterion is whether the statements further the 
outcomes that the FDA wants rather than whether they inform consumers. 
Clearly, the evaluation of new paternalism must include an assessment of 
the autonomy-limiting implication for consumer information. 
 CONCLUSIONS 
 The structure of the new paternalist arguments presented here allows us 
to examine step by step the claims that must be supported to make the 
case for this new direction in regulatory policy. Too often the case for new 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 55
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

paternalism is made, especially in the popular press, as simply a psychologi-
cally aware, soft-touch approach to producing socially affi rmed outcomes. 
“We all know that Americans are too fat so here is a clever new idea to 
change that,” is the essence of the popularized version. However, new 
paternalism is more than that. 
 The foundation of new paternalism is the idea that people have “true 
preferences,” which for a variety of “psychological” reasons they are 
unable to satisfy. Behavioral economists claim that they have new tools 
that enable them to discover what these preferences are. They then claim 
that by a series of behavioral manipulations (sometimes called “nudges”), 
selective or processed information disclosures, taxes, mandates, and so 
forth the policymaker can change that behavior. The change is supposed 
to be toward the greater fulfi llment of the individual’s true preferences. 
In most stylized presentations, the complications of interacting biases or 
other information complexities are abstracted from. Thus, the appropriate 
policy seems clear and straightforward. In fact, given the limitations of 
the data available, the diffi culties are quite signifi cant. Furthermore, new 
paternalists rarely pay signifi cant attention to the institutional or policy-
logic tendencies that their ideas generate. Indeed elsewhere Rizzo and 
Whitman ( 2009a , 738) call this set of ideas a “paternalism-generating 
framework.” 
 The development of new paternalism has added a whole new dimen-
sion to the increasing power and reach of the state. It creates the impres-
sion that areas of behavior which were previously in the domain of private 
individual behavior can be brought under the domain of state concerns 
with only minimal restrictions on liberty and autonomy. But this is an 
 illusion. When serious analysis is applied to the problems of new paternal-
ism, especially its epistemic problems, it is easy to see that the dynamic 
of paternalist arguments leads to the expansion of control of individual 
behavior. 
 NOTES 
  1. Generally speaking, inferring from what would be under certain con-
ditions to what ought to be is analytically little different than inferring 
from what is to what ought to be. In itself this is known as the “natu-
ralistic fallacy.” 
  2. For a detailed analysis of Dutch book arguments, see Vineberg 
( 2011 ). 
56 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

  3. Certain biases may be considered a violation of one or more axioms 
either simultaneously or alternatively. The reader should not place a 
great deal of emphasis on exactly which axiom is being violated. 
  4. It is necessary to distinguish the absence of a complete preference 
ordering from indifference. An agent can prefer  A to  B or  B to  A or 
be indifferent between the two. All of this counts as a preference 
ordering. Incompleteness means that the agent simply does not know 
how he feels about the options. 
  5. This particular heuristic can give rise to inconsistent intertemporal 
preferences because it implies that sometimes the agent chooses the 
sooner amount and other times the agent chooses the larger amount. 
In such a case, the agent would not have a consistent complete prefer-
ence ordering. Behavioralists usually consider the fi rst possibility 
(smaller sooner) a present bias. 
  6. The Strong Axiom of Revealed Preference mirrors this. If  A is revealed 
preferred to  B ,  B can never be revealed preferred to  A . 
  7. Some economists have tried to distinguish between seeming viola-
tions and actual ones (Burkett  2006 , 139, n. 4). The seeming viola-
tion occurs because the agent gets some new information from the 
additional option. But the “seeming” violation is an actual one. As I 
argue above, the claim that there is new information generated by the 
set of alternatives is contrary to the assumption of the axiom so if 
there  is such new information, the axiom is ipso facto violated. If, 
however, we allow that information generated by the set of alterna-
tives can save the axiom (along Burkett’s lines), then the axiom will 
never be violated unless behavior is simply random. It is hard to imag-
ine what else could cause the axiom to be violated as long as we stay 
in the domain of purposeful behavior. An axiom that can never be 
violated cannot serve as a behavioral welfare norm. 
  8. There are many assumptions behind this statement. The most impor-
tant of these assumptions is that there are no capital markets on which 
to borrow or lend. It is also assumed that the money is consumed 
when it is obtained. For a complete list of assumptions, see Read 
( 2004 , 424–43). 
  9. It should be pointed out that the experimental evidence on prefer-
ence reversal has been almost entirely from latitudinal (cross-sec-
tional) studies. Subjects are asked about their various intertemporal 
preferences at a single point in time. On the other hand, preference 
reversal really refers to a change in preferences over time from larger 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 57
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

later to smaller sooner. Therefore, the existence of the phenomenon 
should be ascertained by a longitudinal study. Do people actually 
reverse their decisions over the passage of time? When such a study is 
carried out, there does not seem to be a systematic tendency toward 
preference reversal. There are as many patient shifts (“negative prefer-
ence reversal”) as there are impatient shifts. See Read et al. ( 2012 ). 
 10. But we can go further. This analysis calls into question the interpreta-
tion of the initial discount rate as the result of temptation or viscerally 
induced impatience. The real issue is how people perceive the passage 
of time. 
 11. “…discounting over an interval is greater when it is calculated in 
‘installments’ than when it is done in one operation” (Read  2001 , 9). 
 12. Fritz Machlup ( 1974 ) argued that the assumptions of economic the-
ory were simply analytical devices to make predictions about the 
direction of change of market or aggregate outcomes in response to 
exogenous changes. For this limited purpose, they may succeed in 
many cases. 
 13. Savage ( 1954 , 16) was referring to subjective expected utility theory 
and said it would be “utterly ridiculous” to apply it to large worlds. 
See also Volz and Gigerenzer ( 2012 ). 
 14. For a discussion of the small- and large-world distinction in the con-
text of ecological rationality, see Brighton and Gigerenzer ( 2014 ). 
 15. A more in-depth analysis of some of the issues in this section can be 
found in Rizzo and Whitman (2009b). 
 16. I attribute this exact expression to Robert Sugden in conversation. 
However, the idea had been percolating in my own mind for some 
time and is implicit in Bernheim and Rangel ( 2007 ). 
 17. Saving involves an opportunity cost of present consumption. Whether 
people really have a preference to save more  and consume less is a dif-
ferent question. Having more resources later for consumption is an 
economic good and therefore we all have positive attitudes toward 
that. But at what cost? It should also be noted that the benefi t-cost 
structure of saying things (e.g., for social approval or because of a 
feeling that something is right) is different from the benefi t-cost 
structure of doing things. This is one reason why many economists 
are dubious about the expression of preferences through talk. 
 18. A rational individual would apply the same discount rate over the 
nearer and farther future. 
58 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 19. Discount factors vary inversely with discount rates. A discount factor 
of 1.0 means that there is no discounting and anything above that is 
negative discounting. The lower the discount factor, the more impa-
tience there is. 
 20. Present bias is measured as a discount factor, that is, the percent of the 
future outcome that is brought forth to its present value. Thus, the 
lower the discount factor, the higher the discount rate and the higher 
the level of impatience. 
 21. The psychology of nudges is murky. Can there be too much of a 
nudge? Suppose, for example, that the mechanism by which a nudge 
works is to focus the individual’s attention on an issue. If attention is 
a scarce resource with opportunity costs, is the increased focusing due 
to the policy suboptimal? Perhaps the individual should be focusing 
on another problem. Furthermore, if the problem is status-quo bias, 
then, regardless of the default, there will be people “stuck” in the 
wrong option (Tergesen  2011 ). As the reader can see, nudges do not 
obviate the need for quantitative estimates of the relevant 
parameters. 
 22. Viscusi ( 2002 –2003, 63) discusses the offsetting effects of present 
bias and overestimation of cigarette health risks. He also discusses 
optimism bias (60). 
 23. A more in-depth analysis of the themes in this section can be found in 
Rizzo and Whitman (2009a). 
 24. “Suppose that freedom of choice is part of what people care about. 
Suppose too that if people are denied freedom of choice, they will 
suffer loss in welfare, in part because they feel frustrated and mis-
treated. To the extent this is so, there will be a legitimate and poten-
tially forceful objection, on grounds of welfare, to hard paternalism…” 
(128). However, “there are many opportunities for improving wel-
fare without intruding on freedom of choice” through nudges (23). 
Much of this freedom-of-choice claim is sustainable only by ignoring 
legal impositions on those who are not the direct benefi ciaries of 
paternalism. For example, when restaurants are required to post calo-
ries, they are coerced even if customers are not forced to consume 
low-calorie food. 
 25. These general effects are what Volokh ( 2003 , 1039–51) calls 
incentive-altering slippery slopes and attitude-changing slippery 
slopes. 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 59
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 26. Obese individuals are often assumed to be myopic in the sense that 
they consider the near (present) pleasure of eating but not the distant 
(future) benefi ts of good health. 
 27. Economists would call this a scale effect and the previous adjustment 
a substitution effect. 
 28. See Jacob Sullum, “Snus and E-Cigarettes Are Indisputably Safer 
Than Smoking, Contrary to What The New York Times Wants You to 
Think”   http://reason.com/blog/2015/04/24/snus-and-e-cigarettes-
are-indisputably-s 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Antoñanzas, Fernando, W. Kip Viscusi, Joan Rovira, Francisco J. Braña, Fabiola 
Portillo, and Irineu Carvalho.  2000. Smoking risks in Spain: Part I – Perception 
of risks to the smoker.  Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 21(2): 161–186. 
 Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel.  2007. Behavioral public economics: 
Welfare and policy analysis with non-standard decision makers. In  Behavioral 
economics and its applications , eds. Peter Diamond and Hannu Vartiainen, 
7–84. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 Brandt, Richard B.  1979.  A theory of the good and right . Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Brighton, Henry, and Gerd Gigerenzer. 2012. Are rational actor models ‘rational’ 
outside small worlds? In  Evolution and rationality: Decisions, co-operation and 
strategic behavior , eds. Samir Okasha and Ken Binmore, 84–109. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Bröder, Arndt.  2012. The quest for take-the-best: Insights and outlooks from 
experimental research. In  Ecological rationality: Intelligence in the world , eds. 
Peter M. Todd, Gerd Gigerenzer, and ABC Research Group. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Burkett, John P.  2006.  Microeconomics: Optimization, experiments, and behavior . 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Camerer, C., S.  Issacharoff, G.  Loewenstein, T.  O’Donoghue, and M.  Rabin. 
2003. Regulation for conservatives: Behavioral economics and the case for 
‘Asymmetric Paternalism’.  University of Pennsylvania Law Review 151(3): 
1211–1254. 
 Clarke, Toni. 2015. FDA panel votes against label change to Swedish Match Snus. 
 Reuters , April 10, 2015 ( http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/04/10/
us-swedish-match-fda-idUSKBN0N11VP20150410 ). 
 DeMiguel, Victor, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Raman Uppal.  2009. Optimal versus 
naïve diversifi cation: How ineffi cient is the 1/ N portfolio strategy?  Review of 
Financial Studies 22(5): 1915–1953. 
60 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Fishbach, Ayelet, Ravi Dhar, and Ying Zhang.  2006. Subgoals as substitutes or 
complements: The role of goal accessibility.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 91(2): 232–242. 
 Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue.  2002. Time dis-
counting and time preference: A critical review.  Journal of Economic Literature 
40(2): 351–401. 
 Gigerenzer, Gerd.  2008.  Rationality for mortals: How people cope with uncer-
tainty . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Gigerenzer, Gerd, and Daniel G. Goldstein.  1996. Reasoning the fast and frugal 
way: Models of bounded rationality.  Psychological Review 103(4): 650–669. 
 Lakatos, Imre.  1970. Falsifi cation and the methodology of scientifi c research pro-
grammes. In  Criticism and the growth of knowledge , eds. Imre Lakatos and Alan 
Musgrave, 91–196. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Loewenstein, George.  1996. Out of control: Visceral infl uences on behavior. 
 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 65(3): 272–292. 
 Loewenstein, George, and Peter Ubel. 2010. Economics behaving badly.  The 
New York Times , July 14. 
 Machlup, Fritz.  1974. Spiro Latsis on situational determinism.  British Journal for 
the Philosophy of Science 24: 271–284. 
 Manzini, Paola, and Marco Mariotti.  2006. A vague theory of choice over time. 
 Advances in Theoretical Economics 6(1): 1–27. 
 Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D.  Whinston, and Jerry R.  Green.  1995. 
 Microeconomic theory . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 New York Times editorial. 2015. The perils of smokeless tobacco.  The New York 
Times , April 23. 
 O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin.  2006. Optimal sin taxes.  Journal of 
Public Economics 90(10–11): 1825–1849. 
 Rabin, Matthew.  1999. Comment on ‘what me worry? A psychological per-
spective on economic aspects of retirement,’ by George Loewenstein, 
Drazen Prelec, and Roberto Weber. In  Behavioral dimensions of retirement 
economics , ed. Henry Aaron, 247–251. Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution Press. 
 Read, Stephen.  1995.  Thinking about logic: An introduction to the philosophy of 
logic . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Read, Daniel.  2001. Is time-discounting hyperbolic or subadditive?  Journal of 
Risk and Uncertainty 23: 5–32. 
 ———.  2004. Intertemporal choice. In  Blackwell handbook of judgment and deci-
sion making , eds. Derek J.  Koehler and Nigel Harvey, 424–443. Malden: 
Blackwell Publishing. 
 Read, Daniel, Shane Frederick, and Mara Airoldi.  2012. Four days later in 
Cincinnati: Longitudinal tests of hyperbolic discounting.  Acta Psychologica 
140: 177–185. 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 61
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Rizzo, Mario J., and Douglas Glen Whitman.  2009a. Little brother is watching 
you: New paternalism on the slippery slopes.  Arizona Law Review 51: 
685–739. 
 ———.  2009b. The knowledge problem of new paternalism.  Brigham Young 
University Law Review 2009(4): 905–968. 
 Savage, Leonard J.  1954.  The foundations of statistics . New York: Wiley. 
 Scullum, Jacob. 2015. Snus and e-cigarettes are indisputably safer than smoking, 
contrary to what  The New York Times wants you to think.  Hit &  Run Blog , 
April 24.  http://reason.com/blog/2015/04/24/snus-and-e-cigarettes-are- 
indisputably-s . (It looks like the URL has been truncated). 
 Searle, John R.  1969.  Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Sen, Amartya.  1993. Internal consistency of choice.  Econometrica 61(3): 
495–521. 
 Simon, Herbert A.  1990. Invariants of human behavior.  Annual Review of 
Psychology 41: 1–19. 
 Sunstein, Cass R.  2014.  Why nudge? New Haven: Yale University Press. 
 Sunstein, Cass R., and Richard H. Thaler.  2003. Libertarian paternalism is not an 
oxymoron.  University of Chicago Law Review 70(4): 1159–1202. 
 Tavernise, Sabrina. 2015. Swedish Company asks F.D.A. to remove warnings from 
smokeless tobacco product.  The New York Times , April 8. 
 Tergesen, Anne. 2011. 401(k) law suppresses saving for retirement.  The Wall 
Street Journal , July 7. 
 Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. 2003. Libertarian paternalism.  American 
Economic Review 93(2): 175–179. 
 ———.  2008.  Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness . 
New Haven: Yale University Press. 
 Tullock, Gordon.  1964. The irrationality of intransitivity.  Oxford Economic Papers 
16: 401–406. 
 Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman.  1974. Judgment under uncertainty: 
Heuristics and biases.  Science 185(4157): 1124–1131. 
 Vineberg, Susan. 2011. Dutch book[ie?] arguments. In  The stanford encyclopedia 
of philosophy , ed. Edward N.  Zalta.  http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
sum2011/entries/dutch-book/ 
 Viscusi, W.  Kip.  1990. Do smokers underestimate risks?  Journal of Political 
Economy 98(6): 1253–1269. 
 ———. 2002–2003. The new cigarette paternalism.  Regulation 25: 58–64. 
 Volokh, Eugene.  2003. The mechanisms of the slippery slope.  Harvard Law 
Review 116(4): 1026–1137. 
 Volz, Kirsten G., and Gerd Gigerenzer. 2012. Cognitive processes in decisions 
under risk are not the same as in decisions under uncertainty.  Frontiers of 
Neuroscience 6: 105.  http://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2012.00105 
62 
M.J. RIZZO
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Weatherly, Jeffrey N.  2014. On several factors that control rates of discounting. 
 Behavioral Processes 104: 84–90. 
 Whitman, Douglas Glen, and Mario J. Rizzo.  2015. The problematic welfare 
standards of behavioral paternalism.  Review of Philosophy and Psychology 6(3): 
409–425. 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF BEHAVIORAL PATERNALISM 63
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

65
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_4
 Failing Better: What We Learn 
by Confronting Risk and Uncertainty 
 Adam   Thierer 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Nudge advocates seek to improve decisions about health, wealth, and hap-
piness by applying insights from human psychology and behavioral eco-
nomics to public policy decision-making. 1 The chapters in this collection 
address the trade-offs associated with determining optimal default rules 
and devising laws and regulations that seek to engineer better “choice 
architecture.” 
 Critics of nudge theory often attack this reasoning by noting the infor-
mational defi ciencies faced by policymakers when making such decisions. 2 
Those problems are valid, but an equally compelling critique of nudge 
theory attacks the underlying assumption that better choices must be 
“architected” at all to avoid undesirable outcomes. That is, advocates of 
either “soft” or “hard” paternalistic interventions often fail to appreciate 
the enormous value in allowing experiments—personal, organizational, 
and societal—to run their course and to “learn by doing.” 3 Accordingly, 
this chapter addresses how nudge theory often ignores or devalues how 
ongoing experimentation and experience—including the possibility of 
 A.  Thierer () 
 Mercatus Center at George Mason University ,  Arlington ,  VA ,  USA 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 failure—facilitates greater learning, innovation, resiliency, and progress. 4 
Put simply, when we fail, we can learn a great deal from it. 
 Policymakers and regulatory proponents often seek to short-circuit that 
process of ongoing trial-and-error experimentation, believing that they 
can anticipate and head off many mistakes through preemptive, precau-
tionary steps. No amount of behavioral theorizing can substitute for the 
experiential value gained through ongoing real-world trials and errors, 
however. 5 
 When it comes to human health, wealth, and happiness—and to social 
progress and prosperity more generally—there is no static equilibrium, 
no fi nal destination. There is only a dynamic and never-ending learning 
process. 6 Learning from experience provides individuals and organizations 
with valuable informational inputs regarding which methods work better 
than others. 7 Even more importantly, learning by doing facilitates social 
and economic resiliency that helps individuals and organizations develop 
better coping strategies for when things go wrong. Behavioral theorists 
and nudge advocates often fail to incorporate these insights into their 
analysis and policy proposals. 
 A BETTER WAY TO THINK ABOUT RISK 
 To more fully appreciate what we learn by failing, the way we think and 
talk about risk must be reconsidered. Risk is often mistakenly confl ated 
with harm itself when, in reality, risk represents only the  potential for 
harm 8 or the “potential for an unwanted outcome.” 9 
 But even that defi nition is too limiting because  risk often involves the 
potential for desired outcomes as well as unwanted ones . 10 Every thrill-seeker 
knows this. For example, someone who skydives from an airplane realizes 
that the potential for grave harm exists, but they also derive tremendous 
satisfaction from what they regard as a thrilling experience. Importantly, 
while it is somewhat easier to value the former (i.e., the loss of life or dan-
ger of extreme injury), the latter (happiness or utility) is harder to value. 
This can lead to an overestimation of the catastrophic (but unlikely) dan-
ger and a devaluing of the subjective (but almost certain) reward. 
 Much the same holds true for anyone who has ever started a business. 
Saint Thomas Aquinas once noted that, “If the highest aim of a captain 
were to preserve his ship, he would keep it in port forever.” 11 Of course, 
no captain does so because they have higher aspirations. Like captains of 
ships, businesspeople know the possibility of failure exists when they “take 
66 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

a risk” with a new venture or investment, but so too does the potential for 
enormous reward. That is why they steer the ship of industry out of port 
and into the brave unknown (and potentially quite risky) waters. If they 
didn’t, progress would never occur and society would suffer. As Sir Alfred 
Pugsley, one of the foremost modern experts on structural engineering, 
once noted, “A profession that never has accidents is unlikely to be serving 
its country effi ciently.” 12 
 Generally speaking, therefore, we can think of two types of potential 
benefi ts associated with taking a chance. One is static in that unless you 
take a risk you have no chance of a good outcome. For instance, if you 
don’t buy a lottery ticket, you are not going to win. The second benefi t is 
dynamic and implies learning. If you take a risk and fail, you might learn 
something that allows you or someone else to improve the probability 
distribution next time around. 
 This way of thinking about risk can be applied in more mundane ways. 
For example, anyone who uses a knife or ladder in their home or offi ce 
to complete a task understands the potential for both harm and benefi t 
associated with those tools. But countless tasks would be made more dif-
fi cult—perhaps even impossible—without them. The static benefi t, there-
fore, is that nothing is ever going to get done easily in the kitchen or 
garage without a knife handy. The dynamic benefi t is that, when mistakes 
are made with knives, we learn how to use them better the next time 
around to get those tasks done more effectively and safely. 
 For these reasons, risk must be thought of as a two-sided coin involving 
the potential for both harm and benefi t with learning-by-doing being the 
core benefi t of the process. 
 WHY EMBRACE FAILURE? THE BENEFITS OF LEARNING BY 
DOING 
 The idea of embracing failure may seem bizarre and defeatist at fi rst, but 
its benefi ts are numerous, and were perhaps best summarized by the nov-
elist and playwright Samuel Beckett, who once counseled: “Ever tried. 
Ever failed. No matter. Try Again. Fail again. Fail better.” 13 
 The value of “failing better” is often overlooked in public policy 
debates, and especially in discussions of behavioral economics and nudge 
theory. Individuals, organizations, and nations all benefi t from the knowl-
edge they gain from making mistakes. “Humiliating to human pride as 
it may be,” the Nobel prize-winning economist Friedrich Hayek once 
FAILING BETTER 67
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

wrote, “we must recognize that the advance and even preservation of civi-
lization are dependent upon a maximum of opportunity for accidents to 
happen.” 14 
 What both Beckett and Hayek were alluding to was that there is 
enormous value tied up with learning to confront and cope with risk 
through ongoing experimentation. Progress and prosperity are inex-
tricably linked to trial-and-error experimentation, including the free-
dom to fail in the process. “We could virtually end all risk of failure by 
simply declaring a moratorium on innovation, change, and progress,” 
notes engineering historian Henry Petroski. 15 But the costs to society of 
doing so would be catastrophic. “The history of the human race would 
be dreary indeed if none of our forebears had ever been willing to 
accept risk in return for potential achievement,” observed H.L. Lewis, 
an expert on technological risk trade-offs. 16 Somewhat paradoxically, 
therefore, we must tolerate a certain amount of short-term failure if we 
want long-term success. 17 
 Again, consider basic tools we use almost every day. Most of us suf-
fered a few cuts or burns while learning to use fi re or sharp knives to pre-
pare meals. But these failures taught us important life skills and helped us 
develop a sense of personal responsibility. Likewise, fi rms learn important 
lessons when their business plans fail and the public rejects their goods 
or services. 18 The economist Joseph Schumpeter famously described the 
“perennial gales of creative destruction” that constantly renew capitalist 
economies. 19 If we disallowed risk-taking and propped up every failing 
business model, society would never discover new and better ways of inno-
vating and satisfying consumer needs. 
 These lessons seem self-evident yet are often ignored in the public pol-
icy arena. Indeed, if there is a unifying feature associated with much mod-
ern policymaking, it is the seemingly insatiable impulse to preemptively 
eliminate the potential for failure through well-intentioned regulations—
including nudges. 20 Despite the best of intentions, those preemptive safe-
guards are typically counterproductive and even dangerous to long-run 
economic growth and social prosperity. 21 
 The benefi t of allowing individuals, organizations, and society more 
generally to fail freely is that (a) we learn how to do a thing better the 
next time around and (b) we develop better coping skills in the process of 
facing adversity, helping us to better adjust to future failures. 22 In other 
words, it’s about building resiliency. 23 “Regular, modest failures are actu-
ally  essential to many forms of resilience—they allow a system to release 
68 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

and then reorganize some of its resources,” note Andrew Zolli and Ann 
Marie Healy, authors of,  Resilience :  Why Things Bounce Back . 24 
 Nudge advocates often claim that various supposed cognitive defi cien-
cies among consumers or companies can be preemptively diagnosed and 
remedied through policy interventions. But positive feedback and learn-
ing cannot occur without the possibility of failure. “The role of individual 
learning and adaptation, however, cannot be ignored in assessing the need 
for paternalism,” argues Jeffrey J. Rachlinski. “Simple experience might, 
in some contexts, be a much better cure for cognitive missteps than adopt-
ing a paternalist intervention.” 25 The problem with nudges, Jonathan 
Klick and Gregory Mitchell note, is that they, “interfere with information 
searches, educational investments, and feedback that would occur in the 
absence of paternalistic interventions and that are important to the indi-
vidual’s development of effective decision-making skills and strategies.” 26 
 This gives rise to “cognitive hazards” or cognitive defi ciencies of a dif-
ferent sort than those which concern nudge advocates. Again, seeking to 
head-off failure in the short-term creates the potential for more serious 
failures in the long-run because individuals aren’t learning how to cope 
with those failures and advance their knowledge because, as the case stud-
ies below will illustrate, “learning may be greatest in response to negative 
or unfavorable outcomes.” 27 And this is equally true for even softer forms 
of paternalism, including minor nudges meant to gently push individual 
decision-making in even slightly different directions. 28 
 Again, this learning by doing (and failing) process creates powerful 
feedback loops in both the individual and institutional contexts. 29 Indeed, 
its importance scales up to the entire economy. “Once failure is recog-
nized as being just as important as success in the market process,” note 
economists Steven Horwitz and Jack Knych, “it should be clear that the 
goal of a society should be to create an environment that not only allows 
people to succeed freely but to fail freely as well.” 30 
 WHY PRECAUTION OFTEN DICTATES POLICY 
 Unfortunately, in the context of public policy, many factors conspire to 
make “failing freely” very challenging. Lawmakers and regulators are nat-
urally risk-averse because they fear the political ramifi cations associated 
with short-term setbacks. As a result, they sometimes slow the pace of 
innovation, or directly restrict certain types of economic and social experi-
mentation, to avoid unwanted outcomes for which they might be blamed. 
FAILING BETTER 69
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 These policymakers are engaged in “precautionary principle” think-
ing and rulemaking activities. 31 The precautionary principle generally 
holds that, because a new idea or innovation could pose some theoretical 
danger or risk in the future, public policies should control or limit the 
development of such innovations until their creators can prove that they 
won’t cause any harms. 32 The classic articulation of the principle was set 
forth by a collection of environmental activists in the 1998 “Wingspread 
Consensus Statement,” which stated that, “When an activity raises threats 
of harm to human health or environment, precautionary measures should 
be taken even if some cause and effect relationships are not fully estab-
lished scientifi cally.” 33 
 The problem with letting such precautionary thinking guide policy is 
that it poses a serious threat to technological progress, economic entre-
preneurialism, social adaptation, and long-run prosperity. 34 If public policy 
is guided at every turn by the precautionary principle, innovation is hin-
dered based on fear of the unknown; hypothetical worst-case scenarios 
trump all other considerations. 35 Social learning and economic opportuni-
ties become far less likely, perhaps even impossible, under such a regime. 
In practical terms, it means fewer services, lower quality goods, higher 
prices, diminished economic growth, and a decline in the overall standard 
of living. 36 
 Political scientist Aaron Wildavsky identifi ed the problem with precau-
tionary principle thinking when he described it as “trial  without error” 
reasoning. Wildavsky argued that real wisdom is born of experience and 
that we can only learn how to be wealthier and healthier as individuals and 
a society by fi rst being willing to embrace uncertainty and even occasional 
failure:
 The direct implication of trial without error is obvious: If you can do noth-
ing without knowing fi rst how it will turn out, you cannot do anything at 
all. An indirect implication of trial without error is that if trying new things 
is made more costly, there will be fewer departures from past practice; this 
very lack of change may itself be dangerous in forgoing chances to reduce 
existing hazards. … Existing hazards will continue to cause harm if we fail 
to reduce them by taking advantage of the opportunity to benefi t from 
repeated trials. 37 
 More recently, Nassim Nicholas Taleb has highlighted the benefi ts that 
fl ow from “using error as a source of information. If every trial provides 
70 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

you with information about what  does not work,” he notes, “you start 
zooming in on a solution—so every attempt becomes more valuable, 
more like an expense than an error. And of course you make discoveries 
along the way.” 38 This notion that “success is the culmination of many 
failures” 39 was perfectly captured by inventor Thomas Edison when he 
famously noted of his 10,000 failed light bulb experiments: “I have not 
failed 10,000 times. I have not failed once. I have succeeded in proving 
that those 10,000 ways will not work. When I have eliminated the ways 
that will not work, I will fi nd the way that will work.” 40 In this sense, as 
one expert on innovation policy recent noted, “Failure is lesson, not loss; 
it is gain, not shame.” 41 
 The lesson here is that the ongoing process of experimentation and 
failure helps bring us closer to ideal states and outcomes (not just more 
innovation but also more wealth, better health, etc.).  But we will never 
discover better ways of doing things unless the process of evolutionary ,  experi-
mental change is allowed to continue. Individuals and institutions must be 
at liberty to keep trying  and keep failing in order to learn how to move 
forward and prosper. 42 As the examples discussed below make clear, the 
big leaps forward in societal learning and economic progress came about 
as a result of what we learned following various failures, even catastrophes. 
Precautionary principle reasoning and policymaking makes that process 
less likely, perhaps even impossible. Living in constant fear of worst-case 
scenarios—and premising public policy upon them—means that best-case 
scenarios will never come about. 43 As the old saying goes, “Nothing ven-
tured, nothing gained.” 44 
 WHY FAILURE IS VITAL TO PROGRESS IN ENGINEERING 
 Let us consider some instructive examples of this process in action. First, 
consider what we can learn about the importance of “learning by doing”—
and failing—from the history of structural and mechanical engineering. 
Structures such as skyscrapers and suspension bridges, and machines such 
as ships and airplanes, are remarkably sophisticated contraptions. What’s 
more remarkable, however, is the fact that so few of them fail today. Of 
course, that has everything to do with the fact that previous iterations of 
each  did fail and that we learned so much from those failures. 
 “It is both a sad and happy fact of engineering history that disasters 
have been powerful instruments of change,” notes technological historian 
Edward Tenner. “Designers learn from failure. Industrial society did not 
FAILING BETTER 71
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

invent grand works of engineering, and it was not the fi rst to know design 
failure. What it did do,” Tenner says, “was develop powerful techniques 
for learning [from??] the experience of past disasters.” 45 
 Henry Petroski, author of  To Engineer Is Human: The Role of Failure in 
Successful Design , has noted that the entire history of engineering has been 
one of learning from occasional failures, including buildings and bridges 
falling down and ships and planes sinking or crashing. 46 But,
 were we not willing to try the untried, we would have no exciting new uses 
of architectural space, we would be forced to take ferries across many a river, 
and we would have no trans-Atlantic jet service. While the curse of human 
nature appears to be to make mistakes, its determination appears to be to 
succeed. 47 
 Thus, while it is true that “disasters that do occur are ultimate failures 
of design,” Petroski notes that “the lessons learned from those disasters 
can do more to advance engineering knowledge than all the successful 
machines and structures in the world.” He concludes that, “to understand 
what engineering is and what engineers do is to understand how failures 
can happen and how they can contribute more than successes to advance 
technology.” 48 
 This explains how failure teaches us how to not only cope with adver-
sity but also become far safer in the long run. “The importance of past 
tragedy (whether of natural or human origin) for safety suggests a positive 
corollary of Murphy’s Law,” notes Tenner. “It is that sometimes things 
can go right only by fi rst going very wrong.” 49 
 This uncomfortable reality will not sit well with many safety-conscious 
regulatory advocates who might suggest that past failures simply mean 
that society must redouble our efforts to fi nd preemptive, precautionary 
solutions and avoid similar accidents and calamities in the future. But, 
again, that ignores the fact that strict application of that principle would 
mean many life-enriching, and even life-saving, innovations would ever 
come about. 50 
 THE PROBLEM OF “SURPLUS SAFETY” 
ON THE PLAYGROUND 
 Just as engineers benefi t from “learning by doing,” and by failing, so too 
do individuals in their everyday lives—even children. 
72 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Recall, as noted earlier, how we benefi t in the long run by learning 
how to use basic tools such as knives and ladders early in life—even with 
some cuts and falls suffered in the process. Similarly, any parent who has 
witnessed with great anxiety the fi rst time their child rode a bike without 
training wheels well understands that “falling down is part of growing 
up.” 51 If the training wheels never came off, the experience of riding a bike 
would never be truly mastered. 52 But the secondary effects of prohibiting 
the learning process would be even more profound. People would not 
learn to ride their bikes better or faster. They would not go as far on them. 
They also might not be willing to use even more sophisticated machines 
out of fear of the potential dangers associated with them. 
 If this sounds like a far-fetched hypothetical, consider a powerful real- 
world case study of this phenomenon in action: the recent push for greater 
playground safety. Individuals who grew up before the 1980s can remem-
ber a time when every playground had jungle gyms and other tall structures 
for kids to climb and explore. Then, over the course of the following two 
decades, those tall playground structures started disappearing. 53 Today, 
it is diffi cult to fi nd many playgrounds—and almost none near schools—
where tall climbing structures exist for kids. 54 “The old tall jungle gyms 
and slides disappeared from most American playgrounds across the coun-
try in recent decades because of parental concerns, federal guidelines, new 
safety standards set by manufacturers and—the most frequently cited fac-
tor—fear of lawsuits,” notes John Tierney of  The New York Times . 55 
 Those safety-conscious moves were motivated by the best of intentions. 
Plenty of kids were injured falling off tall structures through the years, so 
tearing down those structures or regulating them to be lower in height 
decreased the danger associated with playground accidents—at least those 
accidents associated with falls from tall, man-made structures. Limitations 
or bans have been imposed on playgrounds in some communities, not only 
due to increased regulation by local governments and the US Consumer 
Product Safety Commission 56 but also by fear of lawsuits following injuries 
to some children. Incidentally, the same process unfolded for high diving 
boards at swimming pools over the past two decades, and today it is hap-
pening again with snow sledding down large hills. 57 
 But, again, risk is a two-sided coin and something valuable is being 
lost when we eliminate all these things from childhood or severely restrict 
them out of an abundance of caution. When tall climbing structures are 
highly regulated or removed from playgrounds, for example, children lose 
the chance to experience the thrill of pushing limits and learning from 
FAILING BETTER 73
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

that process. “Children need to encounter risks and overcome fears on the 
playground,” observes Dr. Ellen Sandseter, a professor of psychology at 
Queen Maud University in Norway. 58 She notes that,
 Climbing equipment needs to be high enough, or else it will be too boring 
in the long run. Children approach thrills and risks in a progressive manner, 
and very few children would try to climb to the highest point for the fi rst 
time they climb. The best thing is to let children encounter these challenges 
from an early age, and they will then progressively learn to master them 
through their play over the years. 59 
 Sandseter and her colleagues cite a wealth of academic studies showing 
that experimentation and experience builds resiliency into children that 
can help them develop vital coping skills that will help them later in life. 60 
As Tierney summarizes:
 While some psychologists—and many parents have worried that a child who 
suffered a bad fall would develop a fear of heights, studies have shown the 
opposite pattern: A child who’s hurt in a fall before the age of 9 is less likely 
as a teenager to have a fear of heights. 61 
 In other words, an overly cautious approach to playground safety is 
counterproductive. It potentially creates life-long anxieties and phobias 
that discourage normal play, experimentation, learning, and enjoyment. 
“Overprotection might thus result in exaggerated levels of anxiety [for 
children],” Sandseter concludes. 62 “Overprotection through governmen-
tal control of playgrounds and exaggerated fear of playground accidents 
might thus result in an increase of anxiety in society. We might need to 
provide more stimulating environments for children, rather than hamper 
their development.” 63 
 There are other secondary effects associated with what some have 
referred to as “surplus safety” on playgrounds. 64 If creative exploration on 
playgrounds is discouraged or forbidden, it certainly will not help alleviate 
the growing problem of childhood obesity. 65 A recent study of 34 daycare 
centers by fi ve pediatric researchers confi rmed that “[s]ocietal priorities 
for young children—safety and school readiness—may be hindering chil-
dren’s physical development.” 66 In particular, those researchers found that 
“[s]tricter licensing codes intended to reduce children’s injuries on play-
grounds rendered playgrounds less physically challenging and interesting. 
74 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

… Because children spend long hours in care and many lack a safe place to 
play near their home, these barriers may limit children’s only opportunity 
to engage in physical activity.” 67 
 Reduced playground time might also affect the sociability of youth by 
diminishing interaction opportunities and the resulting learning experi-
ences. 68 It also might limit the ability of children to explore and learn from 
nature. 69 
 The lesson here can be applied more generally beyond playgrounds. 
Tim Gill, author of  No Fear: Growing Up in a Risk Averse Society , puts it 
best:
 It is worth reminding ourselves of two truths about how children grow up 
to be confi dent, resilient, responsible people. First, they have to be given the 
chance to learn from their mistakes. Second, the best classroom for learn-
ing about everyday life is indisputably the real world, beyond home and 
school. Rather than having a nanny state, where regulation, control and 
risk aversion dominate the landscape, we should embrace a philosophy of 
resilience. 70 
 THE EU, RISK-AVERSE CULTURE, AND THE IMPACT 
ON ENTREPRENEURIALISM 
 Finally, let’s consider a case study that involves entire continents and large 
economies. When a country or continent’s policymakers decide to insti-
tute precautionary principle-based policies in an attempt to head-off any 
number of perceived worst-case scenarios, the results can be devastating 
for consumers, innovators, competitiveness, and living standards. 
 Consider the real-world experiment that has played out on either side 
of the Atlantic over the past two decades in terms of how the European 
Union and the USA dealt with the rise of the Internet and the data-driven, 
digital economy. 
 Many economists and other observers have documented Europe’s 
ongoing struggle with chronic unemployment and general economic mal-
aise. 71 Writing in November 2014,  The Wall Street Journal ’s Matt Moffett 
noted that, “Scarce capital, dense bureaucracy, a culture deeply averse to 
risk and a cratered consumer market all suppress startups in Europe.” 72 
Moffett cited results from the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, which 
surveys startup activity, fi nding that early-stage entrepreneurial activity in 
2013 was just 5 % in Germany, 4.6 % in France, and 3.4 % in Italy,  compared 
FAILING BETTER 75
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

with 12.7 % in the US Moffet noted that many academics and business 
analysts had attributed this to “a deeply ingrained fear of failure that is a 
bigger impediment to entrepreneurship on the Continent than in other 
regions.” 73 
 Europe’s risk-averse culture and “fear-of-failure” policies have also 
likely held back digital innovation. Beginning in 1995 with the adoption 
of its Data Protection Directive, the European Union has instituted highly 
restrictive policies governing online data collection and use. The EU’s 
approach has been shaped by precautionary principle thinking at every 
turn, based largely on concerns about privacy and data security. 
 Meanwhile, the USA adopted a very different disposition that favored 
risk-taking and “permissionless innovation,” or the general notion that 
experimentation with new technologies and business models should gen-
erally be permitted by default. 74 Disruptive technologies were embraced 
(or at least permitted) in the USA and it resulted in the explosive growth 
of the Internet and America’s information technology sectors (computing, 
software, Internet services, etc.) over the past two decades. 75 Those sec-
tors have ushered in a generation of innovations and innovators that are 
now household names across the world, including in Europe. 76 
 The results of this real-world experiment have been striking. Analysts at 
the economic consultancy Booz & Company release annual surveys of the 
world’s most innovative companies and, over the past decade, America’s 
info-tech sectors have dominated the top 10 list. For example, the fi rm’s 
2013 list revealed that 9 of the top 10 most innovative global companies 
are based in the USA and that most of them are involved in computing, 
software, and digital technology. 77 No European company has made the 
list since 2010. Another recent survey revealed that the world’s 15 most 
valuable Internet companies (based on market capitalizations) have a com-
bined market value of nearly $2.5 trillion, but none of them are European 
while 11 of them are US fi rms. 78 
 Many European offi cials and business leaders are waking up to this grim 
reality and are wondering how to reverse this situation. Danish economist 
Jacob Kirkegaard of the Peterson Institute for International Economics 
notes that Europeans “all want a Silicon Valley. … But none of them can 
match the scale and focus on the new and truly innovative technologies 
you have in the United States. Europe and the rest of the world are play-
ing catch-up, to the great frustration of policy makers there.” 79 
 Again, attitudes toward risk and failure account for these differences. 
German economist Petra Moser notes that Europeans are “trying to 
76 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

recreate Silicon Valley in places like Munich, so far with little success,” 
because “[t]he institutional and cultural differences are still too great” and 
“In Europe, stability is prized” above all else, she says. 80 In a recent  New 
York Times essay on this trans-Atlantic clash of visions, James B. Stewart 
noted that:
 Often overlooked in the success of American start-ups is the even greater 
number of failures. “Fail fast, fail often” is a Silicon Valley mantra, and the 
freedom to innovate is inextricably linked to the freedom to fail. In Europe, 
failure carries a much greater stigma than it does in the United States. 81 
 Moreover, he notes, “Europeans are also much less receptive to the kind 
of truly disruptive innovation represented by a Google or a Facebook.” 82 
 What European regulators fail to appreciate is, as Daniel Castro and Alan 
McQuinn of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation 
observe, that “Innovation is about risk, and if innovators fear they will be 
punished for every mistake … then they will be much less assertive in try-
ing to develop the next new thing.” 83 
 Unsurprisingly, many European offi cials are unhappy that American 
operators enjoy these competitive advantages and they are now looking to 
force their more restrictive policies on US-based digital innovators. 84 The 
easier way to “level the playing fi eld” between digital rivals on either side 
of the Atlantic would be for Europe to relax its restrictive, risk-averse poli-
cies to give their innovators a better chance of learning from marketplace 
experimentation. Of course, that would mean that European policymakers 
would need to be willing to embrace the possibility that many of those 
fi rms would fail, or to the extent they succeeded, that traditional privacy 
regulations and other regulations might need to change. 
 Thus far, most European offi cials have shown little willingness to 
embrace that option. In fact, within the so-called sharing economy, 
European governments have moved aggressively to limit or shut down 
ride-sharing provider Uber. Following a major strike by French taxi drivers 
during the summer of 2015, France went so far as to arrest two Uber exec-
utives. 85 (Ironically, downloads of Uber’s mobile app increased following 
the arrests. 86 ) There’s even talk in Europe of creating an EU-wide super- 
regulator, mostly to address concerns about US-based tech companies. 87 
 Such moves are motivated by a fear of disruption and change. 
Whether it is economic or social norms, failure is literally not an option 
in some  European countries; public policies will protect industries, 
FAILING BETTER 77
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 organizations, professions, or even just cultural norms that are threatened 
by technological change. The irony, however, is that the more overzeal-
ously European offi cials seek to avoid the possibility of various short-term 
failures, the more prone the continent is to potentially far more dangerous 
and systemic failures in the long term. 88 
 EPISTEMIC IGNORANCE PERPETUATES THE PRECAUTIONARY 
PRINCIPLE PROBLEM 
 These examples make it clear that there is immense value in embracing 
“risk” and learning from failing often in the process. We can now marry 
this insight to the more predominant critique of paternalistic nudges, 
which is identifi ed in other chapters of this book: behavioral theorists and 
nudge advocates spend so much time focused on the supposed irratio-
nality of consumers or organizations that they ignore the irrationality or 
ignorance of those who (incorrectly) believe they are in the best position 
to solve every complex social or economic problem through paternalistic 
policy solutions. 
 Policymakers simply do not possess the requisite knowledge to perfectly 
plan for every conceivable outcome and they also frequently ignore the 
unintended consequences of well-intentioned policies. 89 Unfortunately, 
like most other humans, regulators suffer from what Taleb calls “epis-
temic ignorance” or hubris concerning the limits of our knowledge. “We 
are demonstrably arrogant about what we think we know,” he says. 90 “We 
overestimate what we know, and underestimate uncertainty.” 91 
 Maureen K.  Ohlhausen, a commissioner at the Federal Trade 
Commission, has succinctly explained why the paternalistic, precautionary 
mindset is dangerous when enshrined into laws or regulations, especially 
when used to regulate new, fast-moving technologies:
 It is … vital that government offi cials, like myself, approach new technolo-
gies with a dose of regulatory humility, by working hard to educate our-
selves and others about the innovation, understand its effects on consumers 
and the marketplace, identify benefi ts and likely harms, and, if harms do 
arise, consider whether existing laws and regulations are suffi cient to address 
them, before assuming that new rules are required. 92 
 In light of the limits of our ability to plan or predict the technologi-
cal future, we must recognize the dangers associated with top-down, 
78 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

fear-of- failure thinking. We must push back against what Tim Harford, 
author of  Adapt , calls the “God Complex,” which refers to the general 
belief that within our own specialized areas of expertise we know every-
thing there is to know about a subject. 93 More broadly, it is important 
to avoid what economist Harold Demsetz referred to as the “Nirvana 
approach” to policy, or the comparison of real-world phenomena and 
results with hypothetically perfect alternatives, which are logically 
impossible. 94 
 This is true even for minor policy nudges aimed at correcting for sup-
posed consumer biases. After all, regulators and policymakers bring their 
own biases to the table when seeking to supposedly correct the biases 
of others and, as Wright and Ginsberg note, “behaviorist proposals fre-
quently assume that the social costs of cognitive error are large and pre-
sumptively greater than the cost of the regulatory solution designed to 
reduce them.” 95 They conclude:
 In short, not all errors imply irrationality because perfect decisionmaking 
would be costly. To miss subtle distinctions between rational and irrational 
decisionmaking will almost certainly lead to erroneous conclusions about 
legal policy. The data required to distinguish rational mistakes from irratio-
nal mistakes, much less to estimate the magnitude of any welfare loss caused 
by the latter, are signifi cant and may be unavailable. 96 
 Moreover, “[b]ecause regulation often represents the preferences 
of high-income households and reduces the disposable income of low- 
income households, regulation has a regressive effect.” 97 Thus, regula-
tion—especially nudges—may simply substitute the values and priorities 
of some groups for others and diminish overall welfare in the process. 98 
 WHEN SHOULD PRECAUTION PREVAIL? 
 Of course, a certain amount of precautionary regulation  might make sense 
when the potential harm being considered is so immediate, tangible, 
highly probable, and potentially catastrophic in nature that “learning by 
doing” simply isn’t practical or wise. For example, almost all countries 
prohibit the private possession of uranium, bazookas, and tanks. These 
things are banned because it is generally acknowledged that their unre-
stricted use would have disastrous consequences. But most cases aren’t 
like this. Instead, we generally allow citizens to freely experiment with 
FAILING BETTER 79
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

technologies, and even engage in risky behaviors, unless a compelling 
case can be made that precautionary regulation is necessary. 99 And this 
is equally true of many items that individuals may unintentionally harm 
themselves with, as was already discussed in the case of knives, ladders, 
and so on. 
 How is the determination made regarding when precaution makes 
sense? This is where the role of benefit-cost analysis (BCA) and regu-
latory impact analysis is essential to getting policy right. 100 BCA rep-
resents an effort to formally identify the trade-offs associated with 
regulatory proposals and, to the maximum extent feasible, quantify 
those benefits and costs. 101 BCA generally cautions against preemp-
tive, precautionary regulation unless all other options have been 
exhausted—thus allowing trial-and- error experimentation and “learn-
ing by doing” to continue. 
 At the federal level in the USA, regulatory policymaking and the BCA 
process are directed by various presidential executive orders and guid-
ance issued by the White House Offi ce of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs (OIRA). 102 As part of any BCA review, OIRA demands “a clear 
explanation of the need for the regulatory action, including a descrip-
tion of the problem that the agency seeks to address.” 103 As part of this 
step, OIRA specifi es, “Agencies should explain whether the action is 
intended to address a market failure or to promote some other goal.” 104 
Second, “[a] clear identifi cation of a range of regulatory approaches” is 
required “including the option of not regulating.” 105 Agencies must also 
consider other alternatives to federal regulation, such as “State or local 
regulation, voluntary action on the part of the private sector, antitrust 
enforcement, consumer-initiated litigation in the product liability system, 
and administrative compensation systems.” 106 Agencies are supposed to 
assess the benefi ts and costs of all these alternatives. 107 If federal regulation 
is still deemed necessary, fl exible approaches are strongly encouraged by 
OIRA. 108 Finally, “[a]n estimate of the benefi ts and costs—both quantita-
tive and qualitative” is required. 109 The quantifi cation of benefi ts and costs 
is strongly encouraged but, when that is impossible, agencies are required 
to describe them qualitatively and make a clear case for action. 110 
 Unfortunately, regulators often ignore those requirements, or at least 
do not take them seriously enough. 111 Worse yet, many agencies are neither 
required to conduct BCA nor have their rulemaking activities approved by 
OIRA. This is like giving regulators a free pass to meddle with new inno-
vation without any serious oversight. 
80 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 All new proposed regulatory enactments—even nudges of a “soft” 
nature—should be subjected to strict BCA and, if they are formally 
enacted, they should also be retrospectively reviewed to gauge their cost- 
effectiveness and continued need. 112 Better yet, sunsetting guidelines 
should be applied to make sure outdated regulations are periodically 
removed from the books so that innovation is not discouraged. 
 Of course, every effort should be made to exhaust all other options 
before even entertaining a discussion about the need for new regulations 
and restrictions. Less-restrictive approaches based on transparency, edu-
cation, and empowerment are almost always preferable to precautionary 
prohibitions. 113 Whether it is health and safety regulation or economic 
policy, giving the public more information and helping them make deci-
sions for themselves is usually the superior option when compared to more 
restrictive regulatory approaches. Education and empowerment-based 
strategies leave more breathing room for continuous learning and inno-
vation through trial-and-error experimentation. Common law legal rem-
edies—contract and property law, torts, and so on—are also more sensible 
alternatives when compared to paternalistic controls. Such ex post rem-
edies allow for experimentation to continue and then let courts identify 
more serious harms as they develop. 114 
 CONCLUSION: AVOIDING FAILURE LEADS TO FAILURE 
 If we hope to prosper both as individuals and as a society, we must pre-
serve the general freedom to “learn by doing,” and even to fail frequently 
in the process. Both individuals and institutions learn how to do things 
better—both more effi ciently and safer—by making mistakes and deal-
ing with adversity. Facing up to challenges and failures is never easy, but 
it helps us learn how to cope with change and continuously devise new 
systems and solutions to accommodate those disruptions. 115 
 For these reasons, we should embrace failure as an essential ingredient 
to the success of a free and prosperous society and not try to “nudge” it 
out of existence. 116 “Success may be grand, but disappointment can often 
teach us more,” Petroski noted of the history of engineering. 117 Much 
the same can be said of economic and social experience and experiments 
more generally. Rigid precautionary principle thinking and policymaking, 
by contrast, interrupts this learning progress and leaves us  more vulnerable 
to the most serious problems we might face as individuals or a society. 
Paradoxically, then, we can conclude that individuals, institutions, and 
FAILING BETTER 81
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

countries that overzealously seek to avoid the possibility of certain short- 
term failures are actually prone to potentially far more dangerous and sys-
temic failures in the long term. 118 
 NOTES 
 
1. Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions 
About Health ,  Wealth ,  and Happiness (Yale University Press, 2008). 
A concise overview of behavioral economics—and critique of its 
applications—can be found in: Christopher Koopman and Nita 
Ghei, “Behavioral Economics, Consumer Choice, and Regulatory 
Agencies,”  Economic Perspectives , Mercatus Center at George Mason 
University, August 27, 2013,  http://mercatus.org/publication/
behavioral-economics-consumer-choice-and-regulatory-agencies 
 
2.  See generally , Joshua D. Wright and Douglas Ginsberg, “Behavioral 
Law and Economics: Its Origins, Fatal Flaws, and Implications for 
Liberty,”  Northwestern University Law Review 106(3) (2012); 
Joshua D. Wright, “Behavioral Law and Economics, Paternalism, 
and Consumer Contracts: An Empirical Perspective,”  NYU Journal 
of Law &  Liberty 2(3) (2007); James C. Cooper, “Behavioral 
Economics and Biased Regulators,” Mercatus Center,  Mercatus on 
Policy , November 21, 2013,  http://mercatus.org/publication/
behavioral-economics-and-biased-regulators 
 
3. Jonathan Klick and Gregory Mitchell, “Government Regulation of 
Irrationality: Moral and Cognitive Hazards,”  Minnesota Law Review 
90 (2006): 1626. (“research from developmental psychology indi-
cates that individuals improve their decision-making skills over time 
through a ‘learning by doing’ process, and that paternalistic policies 
threaten interference in this self-regulatory process.”). 
 
4. Sim B. Sitkin, “Learning Through Failure: The Strategy of Small 
Losses,” in Michael D. Cohen and Lee S. Sproull (eds.), 
 Organizational Learning (Thousand Oaks: Sage, 1996): 541–578, 
(“There is substantial consensus that successful innovation requires 
risk-taking, experimentation, and failure.”). 
 
5. Wright and Ginsberg, “Behavioral Law and Economics,” at 1044–5. 
(“many (but not all) of the behaviorists’ fi ndings are fragile and disap-
pear when exposed to market discipline and the profi t motive, which 
create incentives for participants to specialize and to learn to reduce 
their errors. These incentives are not present in the laboratory.”). 
82 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 
6. Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky,  Risk and Culture (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1983): 195. (“Relative safety is not a 
static but rather a dynamic product of learning from error over 
time.… The fewer the trials?? and the fewer the mistakes to learn 
from, the more error remains uncorrected.”). 
 
7. Ibid., 14. (“much new knowledge must be acquired through experi-
mentation or learning by doing; implementation often involves a 
long feedback loop where each incremental improvement in the 
technology requires new skills, which make further improvements 
feasible…”). 
 
8. Institutional Review Board for the Social and Behavioral Sciences 
(IRB-SBS) at the University of Virginia, “Defi ning Risk,” [last 
accessed December 20, 2014],  http://www.virginia.edu/vpr/irb/
sbs/resources_guide_risk_defi ne.html 
 
9. Department of Homeland Security, Risk Steering Committee,  DHS 
Risk Lexicon , (September 2008): 24,  https://www.dhs.gov/xli-
brary/assets/dhs_risk_lexicon.pdf 
 10. Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky,  Risk and Culture (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1983): 22. (“Risk is also 
opportunity.”). 
 11. Thomas Aquinas,  Summa Theologica , I-II, q. 2, art. 5. 
 12. Quoted in Henry Petroski,  To Engineer is Human :  The Role of 
Failure in Successful Design (New York: Vintage, 1992): 221. 
 13. Samuel Beckett, “Worstward Ho,” (1983). 
 14. F. A. Hayek,  The Constitution of Liberty (1960): 29. 
 15. Henry Petroski,  To Engineer Is Human :  The Role of Failure in 
Successful Design (New York: Vintage, 1992): 170. 
 16. H. W. Lewis,  Technological Risk (New York: WW. Norton & Co., 
1990): x. 
 17. Megan McArdle,  The Up Side of Down :  Why Failing Well Is the Key 
to Success (New York: Viking, 2014), 206. (“Normal accident theory 
tells us that we often have to live with some background rate of 
disasters. But no one wants to be at the mercy of the universe. 
Identifying mistakes and culprits tells us that we can control those 
accidents, and make them not-so-normal.”). 
 18. An extensive literature exists in the fi elds of business management 
and organizational communication regarding what fi rms and other 
organizations can learn from their own past failure or the failure of 
other organizations.  See , e.g., Sim B. Sitkin, “Learning Through 
FAILING BETTER 83
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Failure: The Strategy of Small Losses,” in Michael D. Cohen and 
Lee S. Sproull (eds.),  Organizational Learning (Thousand Oaks: 
Sage, 1996): 541–578; Philippe Baumard and William H. Starbuck, 
“Learning from Failures: Why It May Not Happen,”  Long Range 
Planning 38 (2005): 281–298; Mark D. Cannon and Amy C. 
Edmondson, “Failing to Learn and Learning to Fail (Intelligently): 
How Great Organizations Put Failure to Work to Innovate and 
Improve,”  Long Range Planning 38 (2005): 299–319; Dean A. 
Shepherd, “Educating Entrepreneurship Students about Emotion 
and Learning from Failure,”  Academy of Management Learning & 
 Education , 3(3) (2004): 274–287; Rita Gunther McGrath, “Failing 
by Design,”  Harvard Business Review , April 2011,  https://hbr.
org/2011/04/failing-by-design 
 19. Joseph Schumpeter,  Capitalism ,  Socialism and Democracy (New 
York: Harper Perennial, 1942, 2008) 84. 
 20. Daniel Castro and Alan McQuinn, “How and When Regulators 
Should Intervene,” Information Technology and Innovation 
Foundation Reports, (February 2015): 1,  http://www.itif.org/
publications/how-and-when-regulators-should-intervene . 
(“[I]
nnovation by its very nature involves risks and mistakes—the very 
things regulators inherently want to avoid.”). 
 21. Nathan Rosenberg and L. E. Birdzell Jr.,  How the West Grew Rich : 
 The Economic Transformation of the Industrial World (New York: 
Basic Books, 1986), 29. (“Uncertainty runs throughout the process 
of innovation. … The only known device for resolving the uncer-
tainties surrounding any given innovation proposal is experiment, 
up to and including the manufacture and marketing of a product. 
Such experiments are costly; on the other hand, the failure to under-
take them precludes the possibility of innovation. And the conse-
quences of successful experiments are economic growth.”) Joseph 
Epstein, “ObamaCare and the Good Intentions Paving Co.,”  Wall 
Street Journal , December 31, 2013,  http://online.wsj.com/news/
articles/SB10001424052702304020704579276942556236158 , 
(“Unfortunately, when it comes to public policy, good intentions 
are only slightly better than bad intentions, and not always even 
that.”). 
 22. Aaron Wildavsky,  Searching for Safety (New Brunswick: Transaction 
Books, 1988), 103. (“Allowing, indeed, encouraging, trial and error 
should lead to many more winners, because of (a) increased wealth, 
84 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

(b) increased knowledge, and (c) increased coping mechanisms, i.e., 
increased resilience in general.”) Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky, 
 Risk and Culture (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983): 
197. (“If some degree of risk is inevitable, suppressing it in one place 
often merely moves it to another. Shifting risks may be more danger-
ous than tolerating them, both because those who face new risks 
may be unaccustomed to them and because those who no longer 
face old ones may be more vulnerable when conditions change.”). 
 23. Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky,  Risk and Culture (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1983): 196. (“Resilience is the capac-
ity to use change to better cope with the unknown; it is learning to 
bounce back.”). 
 24. Andrew Zolli and Ann Marie Healy,  Resilience :  Why Things Bounce 
Back (New York: Free Press, 2012): 13. 
 25. Jeffrey J. Rachlinski, “The Uncertain Psychological Case for 
Paternalism,”  Northwestern University Law Review 97, (2003): 
1165.  Also see Jonathan Klick and Gregory Mitchell, “Government 
Regulation of Irrationality: Moral and Cognitive Hazards,” 
 Minnesota Law Review 90 (2006): 1629. (“Through education, 
experimentation, experience, and observation, individuals learn 
which options are most likely to produce desirable outcomes and 
develop competence in the ability to compile and rank-order options, 
and then select the option that will lead to the most favorable 
outcome.”). 
 26. Ibid., 1626. 
 27. Ibid., 1636. 
 28. Ibid., 1632. (“Softer forms of paternalism may also adversely affect 
learning by altering the individual’s representation of the choice set-
ting and how she encodes feedback about success or failure in a 
given situation. The individual does not exert the same level of con-
trol in compiling and assessing options in the presence of soft pater-
nalism, and verbal feedback about even a soft paternalistic situation 
should cause the individual to discount her own role in achieving a 
particular outcome.”). 
 29. For an overview of the literature on learning by doing in the context 
of organizational management, see: Barbara Levitt and James G. 
March, “Organizational Learning,” in Michael D. Cohen and Lee S. 
Sproull (eds.),  Organizational Learning (Thousand Oaks: Sage, 
1996): 516–540. 
FAILING BETTER 85
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 30. Steven Horwitz and Jack Knych, “The Importance of Failure,”  The 
Freeman 61(9) (November 2011),  http://www.fee.org/the_free-
man/detail/the-importance-of-failure#axzz2ZnNlpqHQ 
 31. Adam Thierer, “Technopanics, Threat Infl ation, and the Danger of 
an Information Technology Precautionary Principle,”  Minnesota 
Journal of Law ,  Science &  Technology 14(1) (2013): 309–386. 
 32.  See , e.g., John Frank Weaver, “We Need to Pass Legislation on 
Artifi cial Intelligence Early and Often,”  Slate , September 12, 2014, 
 http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/12/we_
need_to_pass_artifi cial_intelligence_laws_early_and_often.html 
 33. “Wingspread Conference on the Precautionary Principle,” January 
26, 1998,  http://www.sehn.org/wing.html 
 34. Jonathan H. Adler, “The Problems with Precaution: A Principle 
Without Principle,”  The American , May 25, 2011,  http://www.
american.com/archive/2011/may/the-problems-with-precaution-
a-principle-without-principle 
 35. Cass R. Sunstein,  Laws of Fear :  Beyond the Precautionary Principle 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005). 
 36. Adam Thierer, “Who Really Believes in ‘Permissionless Innovation’?” 
 Technology Liberation Front , March 4, 2013,  http://techliberation.
com/2013/03/04/who-really-believes-in-permissionless-
innovation 
 37. Aaron Wildavsky,  Searching for Safety (New Brunswick: Transaction 
Books, 1988): 38. 
 38. Nassim Nicholas Taleb,  Antifragile :  Things That Gain From Disorder 
(New York: Random House, 2012): 71. 
 39. Kevin Ashton,  How to Fly a Horse :  The Secret History of Creation , 
 Invention ,  and Discovery (New York: Doubleday, 2015): 67. 
 40. As quoted in Nathan Furr, “How Failure Taught Edison to 
Repeatedly Innovate,”  Forbes , June 9, 2011,  http://www.forbes.
com/sites/nathanfurr/2011/06/09/how-failure-taught-edison-to-
repeatedly-innovate 
 41. Kevin Ashton,  How to Fly a Horse :  The Secret History of Creation , 
 Invention ,  and Discovery (New York: Doubleday, 2015): 66. 
 42. Bruce Schneier, “Our Decreasing Tolerance to Risk,”  Forbes , August 
23, 2013,  http://www.forbes.com/sites/bruceschneier/2013/
08/23/our-decreasing-tolerance-to-risk . (“We need to relearn how 
to accept risk, and even embrace it, as essential to human progress 
and our free society.”). 
86 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 43.  See generally Adam Thierer,  Permissionless Innovation :  The Continuing 
Case for Comprehensive Technological Freedom (Arlington: Mercatus 
Center at George Mason University, 2014).  Also see H. W. Lewis, 
 Technological Risk (New York: WW. Norton & Co., 1990): 119. 
(“there is never such a thing as a worst case.… Risk without probabil-
ity is, as the French say, like a meal without wine or day without 
sunshine. Yet worst-case planning pervades our society.… There is an 
almost hypnotic appeal to thinking that if you have covered the worst 
case, you have covered everything. But it isn’t true.”). 
 44. Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky,  Risk and Culture (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1983): 28. (“Would people volun-
tarily subject themselves to a lower standard of living and less safety? 
That is what proponents of risk taking—nothing ventured, nothing 
gained—believe will follow from what they deem excessive concern 
with avoiding risks. To them, today’s avoidance of tomorrow’s risk 
is the greatest danger.”). 
 45. Edward Tenner,  Why Things Bite Back :  Technology and the Revenge of 
Unintended Consequences (New York: Vintage Books, 1996): 23. 
 46. Henry Petroski,  To Engineer Is Human :  The Role of Failure in 
Successful Design (New York: Vintage, 1992): viii. (“I believe that 
the concept of failure—mechanical and structural failure in the con-
text of this discussion—is central to understanding engineering, for 
engineering design has as its fi rst and foremost objective the obvia-
tion of failure.”). 
 47. Ibid., at 105. (“Technology has advanced by our constantly seeking 
to understand the hows and whys of our own disappointments, and 
we have always sought to learn from our mistakes lest they be 
repeated. But failures do and will occur… and there is little indica-
tion that innovation will ever be abandoned completely for the sake 
of absolute predictability. That would not seem to be compatible 
with the technological drive of Homo faber to build to ever greater 
heights and to bridge ever greater distances, even if only because 
they are there to be reached or spanned.”). 
 48. Henry Petroski,  To Engineer Is Human :  The Role of Failure in 
Successful Design (New York: Vintage, 1992): viii. 
 49. Edward Tenner,  Why Things Bite Back :  Technology and the Revenge of 
Unintended Consequences (New York: Vintage Books, 1996): 24. 
 50. Peter Huber, “Exorcists vs. Gatekeepers in Risk Regulation,” 
 Regulation , November/December 1983, 28–9. (“The paradox of 
FAILING BETTER 87
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

risk regulation is that too much of it makes life more dangerous. Not 
just more expensive, not just less convenient, but  more dangerous .”). 
 51. Henry Petroski,  To Engineer Is Human :  The Role of Failure in 
Successful Design (New York: Vintage, 1992): 11. 
 52. H. W. Lewis,  Technological Risk (New York: WW. Norton & Co., 
1990): x. (“Risk is part of the price we pay for growth, as nearly all 
parents know.”). 
 53. Tom Norquist, “Climbing Trends on the North American 
PLAYground,”  GameTime News , August 26, 2013,  http://www.
gametime.com/news/entry/climbing-trends-on-the-north-ameri-
can-playground1 . (“I’m sure I’m not the only one who remembers 
from my college Play classes seeing pictures of the original gymnastic 
play equipment that populated our schools and parks at the turn of 
the century. This equipment tended to be well over 10’ tall, often as 
high as a two-story building/ Injuries from falls onto a hard surface 
all but eliminated this type of equipment. Today, if you ask children 
what they want, and we do, they tell us the taller the better.”). 
 54. Kevin Rossignol, “The Changing Shape of America’s Playgrounds,” 
 City Parks Blog , November 20, 2013, (“If you venture out to a park 
with a newly built playground, what you’ll fi nd is a multi-colored 
confi guration lined with a soft rubber padding that seems slightly 
out of place amongst the grass and trees. The iconic playground 
structures adults remember growing up with, such as see-saws, jun-
gle gyms and tall slides, will almost certainly seem smaller and modi-
fi ed, if they are present at all.”). 
 55. John Tierney, “Can a Playground Be Too Safe?”  New York Times , 
July 18, 2011,  http://www.nytimes.com/2011/07/19/science/
19tierney.html?_r=0 
 56. U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission,  Public Playground 
Safety Handbook , November 2010,  http://www.cpsc.gov/page-
fi les/122149/325.pdf 
 57. Scott McFetridge, “Liability concerns prompt some cities to limit 
sledding,”  AP :  The Big Story , January 4, 2015,  http://bigstory.
ap.org/article/4190016301c14b37bee5747373353be5/
liability-concerns-prompt-some-cities-limit-sledding 
 58. Ibid. 
 59. Ibid . at D3. 
 60. Ellen Beate Hansen Sandseter and Leif Edward OttesenKennai, 
“Children’s Risky Play from an Evolutionary Perspective: The Anti-
88 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Phobic Effects of Thrilling Experiences,”  Evolutionary Psychology 9 
(2011): 257–284. 
 61. Ibid. 
 62. Ibid., at 275. 
 63. Ibid. 
 64.  See Shirley Wyver et al. “Ten Ways to Restrict Children’s Freedom to 
Play: The Problem of Surplus Safety,”  Contemporary Issues in Early 
Childhood 11 (2010): 263, 277. 
 65.  See Alice G. Walton, “New Playgrounds Are Safe—and That’s Why 
Nobody Uses Them,”  The Atlantic , February 1, 2012,  http://www.
theatlantic.com/health/archive/2012/02/new-playgrounds-are-safe-
and-thats-why-nobody-uses-them/252108 
 66. Kristen A. Copeland et al. “Societal Values and Policies May Curtail 
Preschool Children’s Physical Activity in Child Care Centers,” 
 Pediatrics 129 (2012): 265. 
 67. Ibid. at 265, 270. 
 68. Ibid. at 266, 269. 
 69. Ibid. at 268 (explaining that exposure to nature is a possible benefi t 
of kids being outside). 
 70. Tim Gill, “Cotton Wool Revolution: Instilling Resilience in Children 
Is a Vital Lesson but Only Makes Sense in a Supportive Society,”  The 
Guardian , October 30, 2007, at 30. 
 71. Adam Thierer, “Europe’s Choice on Innovation,”  Technology 
Liberation Front , December 3, 2014,  http://techliberation.
com/2014/12/03/europes-choice-on-innovation 
 72. Matt Moffett, “New Entrepreneurs Find Pain in Spain,”  Wall Street 
Journal , November 27, 2014,  http://www.wsj.com/articles/
new-entrepreneurs-fi nd-pain-in-spain-1417133197 
 73. Ibid. 
 74. Adam Thierer,  Permissionless Innovation :  The Continuing Case for 
Comprehensive Technological Freedom (Arlington: Mercatus Center 
at George Mason University, 2014); Adam Thierer, “Why 
Permissionless Innovation Matters,”  Medium , April 24, 2014, 
 https://medium.com/tech-liberation/why-permissionless-innovation-
matters-257e3d605b63 
 75.  See Bret Swanson, “The Exponential Internet,”  Business Horizon 
Quarterly (Spring 2014): 40–47,  http://www.uschamberfounda-
tion.org/sites/default/fi les/article/foundation/BHQ-Spring12-
Issue3-SwansonTheExponentialInternet.pdf 
FAILING BETTER 89
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 76. Ibid., at 46. (“The entrepreneurship and investment that has sus-
tained such fast growth for so long is due, in substantial part, to 
light-touch government policies (at least compared to other indus-
tries. … There have been mistakes, but for the most part, scientists, 
entrepreneurs, and big investors have been allowed to build new 
things, try new products, challenge the status quo, cooperate, and 
compete. They have also been allowed to fail.”). 
 77. Booz & Company, “The Top Innovators and Spenders,”  http://
www.strategyand.pwc.com/global/home/what-we-think/innova-
tion1000/top-innovators-spenders#/tab-2013 
 78. Larry Downes, “Europe’s Innovation Defi cit Isn’t Disappearing 
Any Time Soon,”  Washington Post , June 8, 2015,  http://www.
washingtonpost.com/blogs/innovations/wp/2015/06/08/
europes-innovation-defi cit-isnt-disappearing-any-time-soon 
 79. Quoted in James B. Stewart, “A Fearless Culture Fuels U.S. Tech 
Giants,”  New York Times , June 19, 2015,  http://www.nytimes.
com/2015/06/19/business/the-american-way-of-tech-and-
europes.html 
 80. Quoted in Ibid. 
 81. Ibid. 
 82. Ibid. 
 83. Daniel Castro and Alan McQuinn, “How and When Regulators 
Should Intervene,” Information Technology and Innovation 
Foundation Reports (February 2015): 2  http://www.itif.org/pub-
lications/how-and-when-regulators-should-intervene 
 84. Tom Fairless and Stephen Fidler, “Europe Wants the World to 
Embrace Its Internet Rules,”  Wall Street Journal , February 24, 
2015,  http://www.wsj.com/articles/europe-wants-the-world-to-
embrace-its-data-privacy-rules-1424821453 
 85. Romain Dillet, “Uber France Leaders Arrested for Running Illegal 
Taxi Company,”  TechCrunch , June 29, 2015,  http://techcrunch.
com/2015/06/29/uber-france-leaders-arrested-for-running-illegal-
taxi-company 
 86. Dan Primack, “Uber Downloads in France Hit All-Time High after 
Strike,” Fortune , June 30, 2015, http://fortune.com/2015/06/30/
uber-downloads-in-france-hit-all-time-high-after-strike 
 87. Tom Fairless, “Europe Looks to Tame Web’s Economic Risks,” 
 Wall Street Journal , April 23, 2015,  http://www.wsj.com/articles/
90 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

eu-considers-creating-powerful-regulator-to-oversee-web-plat-
forms-1429795918 
 88.  See Adam Thierer, “How Attitudes About Risk & Failure Affect 
Innovation on Either Side of the Atlantic,”  Medium , June 19, 2015, 
 https://readplaintext.com/how-attitudes-about-risk-failure-affect-
innovation-on-either-side-of-the-atlantic-b5f0f41c3466 
 89. Sherzod Abdukadirov, “The Unintended Consequences of Safety 
Regulation,” Mercatus Center at George Mason University, 
 Mercatus Research , June 3, 2013,  http://mercatus.org/publica-
tion/unintended-consequences-safety-regulation 
 90. Nassim Nicholas Taleb,  The Black Swan :  The Impact of the Highly 
Improbable (New York: Random House, 2007): 138. 
 91. Ibid., 140. 
 92. Maureen K. Ohlhausen, “The Internet of Things and the FTC: 
Does Innovation Require Intervention?” Remarks Before the US 
Chamber of Commerce, Washington, D.C., October 18, 2013, 
 http://www.ftc.gov/speeches/ohlhausen/131008internetthingsre
marks.pdf 
 93. Tim Harford,  Adapt :  Why Success Always Starts with Failure (New 
York: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, 2011): 124–7. 
 94. “The view that now pervades much public policy economics implic-
itly presents the relevant choice as between an ideal norm and an 
existing ‘imperfect’ institutional arrangement. This  nirvana 
approach differs considerably from a  comparative institution 
approach in which the relevant choice is between alternative real 
institutional arrangements.” Harold Demsetz, “Information and 
Effi ciency: Another Viewpoint,”  Journal of Law and Economics 
12(1) (April 1969): 1 (italics in original). 
 95. Josh Wright and Douglas Ginsberg, “Behavioral Law and Economics: 
Its Origins, Fatal Flaws, and Implications for Liberty,”  Northwestern 
University Law Review 106(3) (2012): 1048. 
 96. Josh Wright and Douglas Ginsberg, “Behavioral Law and Economics: 
Its Origins, Fatal Flaws, and Implications for Liberty,”  Northwestern 
University Law Review 106(3) (2012): 1048–9. 
 97. Diana Thomas, “The Effects of Regulation on Low-Income 
Households,” Testimony Before the House Committee on the 
Judiciary, 
July 
9, 
2013, 
 http://mercatus.org/publication/
effects-regulation-low-income-households 
FAILING BETTER 91
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 98. Diana Thomas, “Regressive Effects of Regulation,” Mercatus Center 
Working Paper, No. 12-35, November 27, 2012,  http://mercatus.
org/publication/regressive-effects-regulation .  Also see Henry I. Miller, 
“When Bureaucrats Get Away with Murder,” Hoover Institution, 
 Defi ning Ideas , July 1, 2015,  http://www.hoover.org/research/when-
bureaucrats-get-away-murder . (“Although it is diffi cult to quantify pre-
cisely the relationship between mortality and the deprivation of income, 
academic studies suggest as a conservative estimate that approximately 
every $7 million to $10 million of regulatory costs will induce one addi-
tional fatality through this indirect ‘income effect.’ Because unnecessary 
deaths are the real costs of regulators’ ‘erring on the side of safety,’ 
excessive regulation has been dubbed ‘statistical murder.’”); Robert W. 
Hahn, Randall W. Lutter, and W. Kip Viscusi, “Do Federal Regulations 
Reduce Mortality?” (Washington, DC: AEI-Brookings Joint Center for 
Regulatory Studies, 2000),  http://law.vanderbilt.edu/fi les/archive/
011_Do-Federal-Regulations-Reduce-Mortality.pdf 
 99. This section is adapted from: Adam Thierer, “Technopanics, Threat 
Infl ation, and the Danger of an Information Technology 
Precautionary Principle,”  Minnesota Journal of Law ,  Science & 
 Technology 14(1) (2013): 356–64. 
 100. John Morrall and James Broughel, “The Role of Regulatory Impact 
Analysis in Federal Rulemaking,” Mercatus Center at George Mason 
University, April 10, 2014,  http://mercatus.org/publication/
role-regulatory-impact-analysis-federal-rulemaking 
 101.  See Susan E. Dudley and Jerry Brito,  Regulation :  A Primer , 2nd ed. 
(Arlington: Mercatus Center at George Mason University, 2012), 
97–98 (“The cost of a regulation is the opportunity cost—whatever 
desirable things society gives up in order to get the good things the 
regulation produces. The opportunity cost of alternative approaches 
is the appropriate measure of costs. This measure should refl ect the 
benefi ts foregone when a particular action is selected and should 
include the change in consumer and producer surplus.”); Jerry Ellig 
and Patrick A. McLaughlin, “The Quality and Use of Regulatory 
Analysis in 2008,”  Risk Analysis 32(855) (2012). 
 102. See Richard B. Belzer, “Risk Assessment, Safety Assessment, and the 
Estimation of Regulatory Benefi ts,” Mercatus Center Working Paper 
(Arlington: Mercatus Center at George Mason University, 2012), 5, 
 http://mercatus.org/publication/risk-assessment-safety-assessment-
and-estimation-regulatory-benefi ts 
92 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 103. White House, Offi ce of Information and Regulatory Affairs, 
 Regulatory Impact Analysis :  A Primer (2011), 2,  http://www.
whitehouse.gov/sites/default/fi les/omb/inforeg/regpol/circular-
a-4_regulatory-impact-analysis-a-primer.pdf 
 104. Ibid. 
 105. Ibid. 
 106. Ibid. 
 107. Ibid., 7. 
 108. Ibid., 2, 5. 
 109. Offi ce of Information and Regulatory Affairs,  Regulatory Impact 
Analysis , 3. 
 110. Ibid., 3–4. 
 111. Robert W. Hahn and Patrick M. Dudley, “How Well Does the U.S. 
Government Do Benefi t-Cost Analysis?”  Review of Environmental 
Economics and Policy 1(2) (Summer 2007): 192–211; Jerry Ellig 
and Patrick McLaughlin, “The Quality and Use of Regulatory 
Analysis in 2008,”  Risk Analysis 32(5) (May 2012): 855–880, 
 http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2011.
01715.x/abstract 
 112. Cass R. Sunstein, “Regulation in an Uncertain World,” Speech Before 
the National Academy of Sciences Government-University-Industry 
Roundtable Meeting, Washington, DC, June 20, 2012,  https://www.
whitehouse.gov/sites/default/fi les/omb/inforeg/speeches/regula-
tion-in-an-uncertain-world-06202012.pdf . (“Retrospective analysis 
has long been recommended by those interested in empirical assess-
ment of regulations.”) Randall Lutter, “Regulatory Policy: What Role 
for Retrospective Analysis and Review?”  Journal of Benefi t-Cost 
Analysis , March 2013,  http://mercatus.org/publication/regulatory-
policy-what-role-retrospective-analysis-and-review 
 113. Adam Thierer, “The Pursuit of Privacy in a World Where Information 
Control Is Failing,”  Harvard Journal of Law &  Public Policy 36 
(2013): 409–55. 
 114. James Broughel, “OMB 2014 Draft Report to Congress on the 
Benefi ts and Costs of Federal Regulations and Unfunded Mandates 
on State, Local, and Tribal Entities,” Mercatus Center at George 
Mason University,  Public Interest Comment , September 2, 2014, 
 http://mercatus.org/sites/default/fi les/Broughel-OMB-2014-
PIC-090214.pdf . (Outlining a set of “Principles for Regulation of 
New Technologies in the Face of Uncertainty.”). 
FAILING BETTER 93
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 115. Petroski,  To Engineer Is Human , at 62. (“No one  wants to learn by 
mistakes, but we cannot learn enough from successes to go beyond 
the state of the art.”). 
 116. Will Yakowitz, “Why You Need to Embrace Failure,”  Inc. , December 
16, 2013,  http://www.inc.com/will-yakowicz/if-youre-not-fail-
ing-youre-not-succeeding.html 
 117. Petroski,  To Engineer Is Human , at 9. 
 118. Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky,  Risk and Culture (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1983), 196. (“The ability to learn 
from errors and gain experience in coping with a wide variety of dif-
fi culties, has proved a greater aid to preservation of the species than 
efforts to create a narrow band of controlled conditions within 
which they would fl ourish for a time…”). 
94 
A. THIERER
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

95
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_5
 Behavioral Nudges and Consumer 
Technology 
 Steve   Wendel 
 NEAT TRICKS 
 A cap for medicine bottles that glows to remind you when to take medi-
cation. 1 A report that shows you when your neighbors are spending less 
than you are on electricity, and nudges you to spend less as well. 2 A subtle 
change to your Facebook feed that triggers a positive or negative emo-
tion. 3 Countless tiny experiments every day on websites around the world 
to measure the effects of colors, images, and small changes in wording on 
driving you to purchase something online. 4 
 Almost without public notice, the last few years have seen the explosive 
growth of behavioral nudges applied to consumer products. The examples 
above cover merely a few of them. Many of these new applications are 
clearly benefi cial to consumers—in fact, consumers pin their hopes on 
these tools to help them where they have struggled to meet their own 
goals. Some, however, are clearly more problematic. 
 In this chapter, we take a look at how private sector companies are 
applying behavioral interventions or “nudges” to consumer products, 
especially with digital technology.
 S.  Wendel () 
 Morningstar ,  Chicago ,  USA 
 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

•  We start off by asking: how are behavioral nudges—until recently 
the domain of academic researchers—making their way into con-
sumer products? 
•  Then, we examine products that employ behavioral nudges, with 
a particular focus on two areas where they have been most notably 
applied: fi nance and health. 
•  Next, we take a step back and categorize the underlying behavioral 
biases these nudges attempt to address—from consumer inattention 
to procrastination. 
•  Finally, we examine the limited, though growing, information about 
the effectiveness of these behavioral nudges in practice, and how com-
panies are learning to iteratively improve that impact in novel ways. 
 While no comprehensive survey of behavioral nudges in consumer 
products appears to exist, and creating one is beyond the scope of this 
chapter, our goal is to provide a framework for thinking about these 
nudges and introduce core concepts that both practitioners and academics 
can ask about their purpose, theoretical backing, and empirical impact. 
 HOW BEHAVIORAL TECHNIQUES ARE REACHING PRIVATE 
SECTOR PRODUCTS 
 Before we look at how behavioral nudges are being applied in private sec-
tor products, let us consider how behavioral nudges are reaching the pri-
vate sector at all. Much of the research on behavioral nudges comes from 
the academic fi elds of behavioral economics and psychology, especially 
the psychology of judgment and decision-making. Academic research-
ers working at universities and colleges, especially in the USA, have liter-
ally created these fi elds. It is only through recent and popular books like 
 Nudge (Thaler and Sunstein  2008 ),  Predictably Irrational (Ariely  2008 ), 
and  Thinking Fast and Slow (Kahneman  2011 ) that this wave of behav-
ioral research, and the nudges based on that research, have entered the 
mainstream. All of those books were authored by leading researchers in 
the fi eld and draw heavily on peer-reviewed publications written by the 
authors and other academic researchers. 
 One might reasonably assume that similar academic researchers are 
bringing behavioral nudges into private sector products. Instead, people 
whose daily work involves building products—designers and product 
managers like Deena Rosen of Opower and Kelvin Kwong of Jawbone—
96 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

appear to be the most active users of behavioral nudges in consumer 
products. The main reason is that there are relatively few behavioral econ-
omists in the country, 5 and the product design community (especially) 
has a long-standing interest and practical training in consumer psychol-
ogy. 6 Behavioral economics has been incorporated into existing product 
design approaches as simply another, popular, way of understanding users, 
as seen in design toolkits like Dan Lockton’s  Design with Intent (2013) 
or Stephen Anderson’s  Mental Notes ( 2013 ). While there are a few high- 
profi le examples of behavioral scientists who work directly with private 
companies—Dan Ariely’s role as the Chief Behavioral Offi cer at the startup 
Timeful being one such example—that doesn’t appear to be the norm. 
 By and large, behavioral techniques appear to reach the private sector 
via three routes:
•  Books. In this author’s admittedly nonscientifi c survey of private 
sector companies, 7 the majority of companies that apply behavioral 
techniques do so based on the three popular press books mentioned 
above:  Thinking ,  Fast and Slow (Kahneman  2011 ),  Nudge (Thaler 
and Sunstein  2008 ), and  Predictably Irrational (Ariely  2008 ). Others 
draw upon user interface design books like  Seductive Interaction 
Design (Anderson 2011) and  Evil by Design (Nodder  2013 ), writ-
ten by designers who themselves build upon the academic literature. 
•  Behavioral scientists training practitioners . From BJ Fogg’s Bootcamp 
to Dan Ariely’s Startuponomics, researchers are helping entrepre-
neurs, product managers, and designers learn behavioral techniques 
that they can apply to their products. 8 The Action Design Network, 
Habit Design Meetup, and the London Behavioural Economics 
Network each hold monthly public events that bring together 
researchers and practitioners to learn new techniques. 9 
•  Consulting . Some behavioral scientists also consult directly with pri-
vate companies; BJ Fogg and Dan Ariely’s  Irrational Labs and Brian 
Wansink’s  Slim by Design , for example, each advertise consulting ser-
vices. 10 New behavioral consulting companies such as ideas42 and 
The Greatest Good Group in the USA and the quasi-governmental 
Behavioral Insights Team in the UK also work with clients around 
the world to solve problems using behavioral techniques. 11 Finally, 
some marketing agencies have hired behavioral scientists to provide 
services to their clients, for example, Ogilvy Change, Brain Juicer, 
and FCB. 12 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 97
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 The manner in which behavioral techniques reach the private sector 
matters for how those techniques are applied. One challenge facing private 
sector companies is that the lessons from behavioral research are often 
divorced from the processes by which they were developed. Companies 
apply behavioral interventions—like loss aversion 13 or peer competitions—
in contexts completely foreign to the original academic settings. As we will 
discuss later in this chapter, context matters—and thus, shapes whether 
behavioral nudges actually have their intended effect. 
 Another challenge is that without a strong, direct link between pri-
vate sector practice and academic research, practical lessons from the pri-
vate sector don’t appear to be reaching the deeper and more theoretical 
discourse in the academic literature. In interviews for this book chapter, 
the author found that consulting companies and marketing agencies that 
apply behavioral techniques for their clients and assess their impact are 
often under nondisclosure agreements about their work—they can’t share 
lessons publically, and certainly not for academic publication. While some 
lessons may fi lter back to the academic world via informal conversations, 
the process is unlikely to be either systematic or complete. 
 This chapter is an initial attempt at shedding light on private sector 
applications of behavioral nudges, especially in consumer technology, so 
that practitioners and academic researchers alike can better understand the 
current state of the fi eld and learn from each other. Let us start with two 
of the most active and exciting areas of application: health and fi nance. 
 EXAMPLES OF BEHAVIORAL NUDGES IN CONSUMER 
PRODUCTS 
 Health Applications 
 Who hasn’t seen—or owned—a wearable exercise band like those from 
Jawbone, FitBit, or Nike, or a smart watch by Pebble, Motorola, or Apple? 
Consumers bought an estimated 33 million of them in 2014 alone, up 
from virtually none in 2010 (Danova  2015 ). 14 They appear to be every-
where; they are also one of the most obvious examples of behavioral 
nudges in consumer technologies. 
 Companies like Jawbone explicitly use behavioral research to help their 
users do things like exercise more and sleep better (Kwong  2015 ). In 
practice, that means they do two things. First, they read the academic 
literature and fi nd effective  behavioral interventions like peer comparisons 
98 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

that they then implement in their user interfaces. Second, they use  behav-
ioral research methods to verify the impact of their products and, often, to 
iteratively improve them. 
 Here’s an example. Lots of people have diffi culty following through 
on their desire to get a good night’s sleep. At the beginning of the day, it 
makes sense—we all know a regular eight hours (or so) of sleep is impor-
tant to our health, mood, and so on. But, when the time comes to either 
go to sleep or watch another episode of TV, our willpower breaks down. 
The team at Jawbone read the behavioral research literature and decided 
to try a principle known as “commitment and consistency” to help people 
follow through on their desire to sleep well; commitment and consistency 
refers to our tendency to follow through on an action (and related actions) 
once we’ve made even a small personal commitment to it—without penal-
ties or incentives being applied (Cialdini 2007). In the mobile application 
that accompanies Jawbone’s exercise and sleep tracker, they added a little 
pop-up message—asking people whether they would go to sleep earlier. 
They tested the impact of the message on actual sleep using a random-
ized control trial (the primary method that behavioral researchers use to 
measure the impact of their nudges). They found that a simple nudge 
to encourage commitment and consistency made participants 72 % more 
likely to go to bed early enough to get seven hours of sleep (Kwong  2015 ). 
 In the wearable space overall, behavioral nudges appear to be quite 
common. For example, many exercise bands have accompanying mobile 
applications that facilitate the setting of specifi c, actionable goals, provide 
feedback on performance, and create peer networks that support those 
goals. They also employ intelligent defaults to allow the user to focus on 
more challenging and interesting tasks. Take FitBit’s exercise bands and 
mobile applications as an example:
•  FitBit automatically defaults users into a reasonable (and standard) 
goal of 10,000 steps per day. 
•  Progress toward the goal is visible on the band and via the mobile 
and online applications. 
•  Users have the option to connect with friends and colleagues who 
also have a FitBit, can see and share progress, and get encourage-
ment (or friendly jabs) through the interface. 
 Automation is also a core technique used across multiple products, 
where exercise bands automatically track exercise (such as the number of 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 99
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

steps taken) to remove drudgery; many also automatically track heart rates 
and sleep times. Each of these techniques, from goal-setting to provid-
ing feedback on progress, has been well studied in the broad behavioral 
research literature and found to be effective under the right circum-
stances. 15 In addition to physical wearables, fi tness apps such as Moves, 
RunKeeper, and Motivate use similar nudges of automation, peer support, 
and commitment devices to encourage exercise. 
 Beyond the wearable space, behavioral techniques appear to be com-
mon in three other health and wellness areas. First, we fi nd them in 
medication adherence. Over 50  % of patients with chronic conditions 
don’t take their medicines as prescribed (Brown and Bussell  2011 ), lead-
ing to signifi cant complications and medical risks for patients. Vitality’s 
Glowcaps, the glowing caps on medicine bottles mentioned above, are 
a clever behaviorally informed solution to this problem. 16 Other inter-
ventions range from Abiogenix’s uBox pill reminder to lottery-based 
incentives for adherence (Volpp et al.  2008 ) to apps that provide track-
ing capabilities along with reminders and other nudges (e.g., My-Meds.
com). A 2014 survey found 160 medication adherence smartphone apps 
alone (Dayer et al.  2013 ). 
 Employee wellness programs are another area in which we fi nd behav-
ioral interventions for health. Companies like Keas use the social psychol-
ogy of competitions and points (aka gamifi cation) to encourage exercise 
and good diet among employees (Keas  2015 ). Employees are given a list 
of specifi c actions, like undertaking a health risk assessment, which will 
earn them points that are compared to peers and can trigger incentive dol-
lars. Virgin Health lists ten behavioral techniques at work in its employee 
wellness program: from fi nancial incentives to social support to feedback 
about progress (Turgiss 2014). Omada Health, for example, employs 
behavioral counseling based on the NIH’s Diabetes Prevention Program 
in its application, to help employees avoid diabetes (Omada Health  2014 ). 
 And, of course, there are mobile dieting programs. There are 55 apps in 
the offi cial “weight loss” category on the Apple App store, and over 5000 
search results for “diet.” 17 Many of these apps, like DietBet, use competi-
tions or social support to “reward” dieters. Weight Watchers applied the 
work of BJ Fogg, head of the Stanford University Persuasive Technology 
Lab and pioneer in the fi eld, to redo its interface to be more behaviorally 
effective (Kosner  2012 ). Fogg’s behavioral model focuses on three core 
components (Fogg  2009 ): the motivation to act (which is often already 
present), the ability to act (in which a myriad of frictions and barriers can 
100 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

block action), and a trigger to act now (such as an email from the applica-
tion reminding people to plan out their meals). 
 Noom’s mobile phone–based weight loss application combines BJ 
Fogg’s Motivation-Ability-Trigger model with Ryan and Deci’s Self 
Determination Theory ( 2000 ) to focus on and remove points of friction 
that hinder people from taking action (Petakov  2015 ). For example, the 
app automatically predicts and fi lls out meal descriptions in a diet log since 
much of eating behavior is habitual. In another example, Brian Wansink, 
head of the Cornell Food and Brand Lab and author of  Mindless Eating 
and  Slim by Design , explicitly puts his research fi ndings on food psychol-
ogy and choice architecture into simple checklists that people can interact 
with online to help them “mindlessly” lose weight (Wansink  2015b ). 18 
 Applications in Finance 
 In fi nance, there has been a similar fl owering of behavioral innovations 
to help consumers manage their money more effectively. In fact, behav-
ioral fi nance, the study of how people interact with money and the com-
mon biases we face when making fi nancial decisions (e.g., Thaler  2005 ), 
is one of the earliest and best established research traditions in behav-
ioral economics. In terms of digital technology, one set of applications 
that employs behavioral nudges is focused on investments and another is 
focused on day-to-day money management. 
 In the investment arena, companies like Betterment explicitly apply 
behavioral lessons to help investors avoid common mistakes (Egan  2015 ). 
For example, during market downturns, investors often become anxious 
and remove their money from the market—an understandable but ter-
rible thing to do, since their investments are then at their  lowest value. 
Betterment conducted a randomized control trial in which they added a 
“tooltip” (icon for more information) that warned individuals when they 
were about to withdraw money. It provided information about the dangers 
of hasty withdrawals and resulted in a 10 % decrease in withdrawals (Egan 
 2015 ). 19 Betterment’s Director of Behavioral Finance and Investments, 
Dan Egan, applies lessons from the behavioral literature and conducts new 
experimental tests of behavioral interventions like those in their product 
(Egan  2015 ). Similarly, leading investment research provider Morningstar 
has recently formed a new advisory board with prominent behavioral sci-
entists to develop and fi eld test interventions in their products that can 
help everyday investors (Morningstar  2015 ). 20 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 101
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 In personal fi nance, HelloWallet 21 has been a leading proponent of 
behavioral science for better money management. HelloWallet uses behav-
ioral techniques such as peer comparisons, default options, and refram-
ing, all to improve savings rates. SaveUp uses sweepstakes with big prizes 
(based on behavioral research into variable rewards) to encourage increased 
savings through their application. Popular personal money management 
tools like Mint.com also apply behavioral techniques such as providing 
descriptive norms (“75 % of Americans establish a savings account to plan 
for their future”) and targeted personalization (“Hi, I’m Vince, and I’m 
a Product Manager here at Mint. I noticed you…”) in their products to 
encourage people to take actions in their application that support savings 
behavior (Maniago 2014). 22 
 The US Household Finance Initiative, part of the international devel-
opment agency Innovations for Poverty Action, is explicitly working to 
spread the application of behavioral science in consumer fi nancial prod-
ucts. They provide grants to companies ranging from Prospera to The 
Financial Clinic, and then pair the companies up with behavioral scien-
tists who can help them implement effective behavioral nudges in their 
products. 23 Another innovation program for fi nancial technology, by the 
Center for Financial Services Innovation (CFSI), supplies grants for new 
ideas in fi nancial services; some of which, like Clarifi  and Doorways to 
Dreams, apply behavioral techniques to help users save for the future. 24 
 Broader Applications 
 Looking beyond health and fi nance applications, where can behavioral 
nudges be found? We can see them scattered across many industries and 
technologies. In the digital realm, we see products such as Stickk.com, 
which uses commitment devices to encourage people to follow through on 
self-specifi ed goals (Blanding  2014 ). Users set their goal, and then decide 
on an amount of money they will lose if they fail to fulfi ll their goals; the 
money can go to a charity they like, or more interestingly, to a one they 
dislike—further encouraging them not to fail. We also see companies like 
Facebook, which reportedly conducted hundreds of  experimental tests 
(Albergotti  2014 ), from a nudge to mobilize voters (Bond et al.  2012 ) 
to an ill-fated nudge to induce positive (or negative) moods by tweaking 
the content users saw on their site (Meyer 2014; Kramer et  al.  2014 ). 
Companies such as Automatic and GreenRoad provide feedback on driving 
history and fuel effi ciency to encourage better driving habits. It is diffi cult 
102 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

to generate an exhaustive list, however, especially since many companies 
refuse to talk about the particular techniques applied in their products. 
 In nondigital consumer products, Opower’s energy reports are one of 
the most prominent examples. Opower, mentioned at the start of this arti-
cle, uses cleverly crafted peer comparisons to highlight how much one’s 
neighbors spend on energy, in order to encourage effi ciency. Also in the 
energy space, Ambient’s Energy Joule provides clear immediate feedback 
on energy prices, glowing red when prices are high and providing a digital 
readout with information about household consumption, to nudge con-
sumers to spend less on electricity. 
 In terms of physical environments, there are a few often-cited examples. 
Wansink’s Food and Brand Lab has redesigned the layout and display of 
food in cafeterias around the world to encourage healthier eating—put-
ting unhealthy foods behind frosted glass, making water bottles easier to 
reach, and so on (see Kuang  2012 ; Wansink  2015b ). Another famous 
example was reported by Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein ( 2008 ): at the 
Schiphol International Airport in Amsterdam, an economist decided to 
“etch an image of a black house fl y onto the bowls of the airport’s urinals, 
just to the left of the drain.” The result: Spillage declined 80 percent. 
 Uncertainty around What Really Is a Nudge 
 When you look broadly out at the fi eld, behavioral nudges seem to be 
almost everywhere. However, things become fuzzy very quickly. 
 For example, behavioral researchers have studied the impact of remind-
ers to encourage people to follow up on a previously committed action 
(they are surprisingly effective). Such external reminders are believed to 
“work” because of failures in the standard economic model: that is, lim-
ited attention and limited planning ability hinder our effi cient pursuit 
of our self-interest. Researchers have developed models of the decision- 
making process, which can forecast the impact of such reminders (e.g., 
Karlan et al.  2011 ). Does that mean that any application that reminds 
people to take action is actually applying behavioral nudges? That seems 
extreme—especially since people used reminders long before “behavioral” 
research even existed. 
 In the digital design community, there is a refrain that all designs are 
inherently persuasive (e.g., Redstrom  2006 ; Fabricant  2010 ) and that the 
point of design is to shape behavior. In fact, one can reasonably argue that 
nudges are literally everywhere because products often seek to shape con-
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 103
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

sumer behavior and leverage behavioral techniques. Facebook encourages 
us to log in habitually using random rewards—updates and references from 
friends. Rosetta Stone nudges (or pushes) us to learn languages effectively 
using structured feedback and goal setting. Our online calendars nudge us 
to remember appointments. Ads for everything from shoes to cigarettes 
use techniques like social proof (testimonials) and scarcity (limited time 
offers) to nudge us to buy. And so forth. When we expand our sights to 
our physical environment, everything from the design of chairs to the 
placement of stairs affects our behavior. 
 Unfortunately, “behavioral nudges are everywhere, in everything” is 
not a very useful way to analyze nudges. To draw the line between “prod-
ucts that apply behavioral nudges” and those that don’t, there are a few 
different questions we might ask, such as:
 1.  How was the technique developed? Was it invented or at least exten-
sively studied by behavioral scientists? 
 2.  How is the technique applied? Are behavioral scientists involved, either 
directly or through published research? 
 3.  Is the product intended to change behavior? 
 There’s no “right” answer to these questions, of course, nor any uni-
versal defi nition of what constitutes a nudge. As a practical matter, this 
author focuses on cases where behavioral scientists have developed or 
otherwise researched a technique and that research is intentionally used 
to change behavior. Admittedly, this defi nition is still messy, however, 
because it means that context matters in determining whether something 
is a “behavioral nudge”:
•  Simple reminders, for example (like sending an email), often aren’t 
behavioral nudges. But, if a behavioral researcher develops a nuanced 
model of decision-making and inattention, and then tests it in the 
fi eld using experimental methods, that probably qualifi es (at least 
under the defi nition that this author uses). 
•  When Homer wrote about the mythical Odysseus asking his crew to 
tie him to the mast of his ship so that he could not answer the siren’s 
call, he wasn’t describing a behavioral nudge (a proto-nudge, perhaps). 
When behavioral scientist Dean Karlan helped develop Stickk.com 
using precommitment and a theoretically grounded model of decision-
making (e.g., Byran et al.  2010 ) 25 —he designed the product to nudge. 
104 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Throughout this chapter, we’ve focused on nudges that are explic-
itly part of the behavioral research canon: actions that intentionally 
shape user behavior using a theoretically grounded understanding of 
decision- making from the behavioral literature. Each of these nudges 
addresses one or more behavioral biases or quirks of the decision-mak-
ing process that researchers have identifi ed. Let us now turn our atten-
tion to those biases. 
 WHAT TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS ARE USED? 
 As we’ve seen, the scope and variety of behavioral nudges in consumer 
products is vast. One useful way to structure an analysis of the space is 
to look not at the particular products themselves but at the underlying 
behavioral biases they seek to overcome or, in some cases, exploit. There 
are literally over a hundred behavioral biases that researchers have identi-
fi ed which can be turned into behavioral nudges (e.g., see Richards  2015 ), 
but these biases fall into a few straightforward categories. 
 We can think about the range of behavioral biases as a chronicle of our 
fundamental cognitive limitations, and how our minds use clever tricks 
to overcome them. On the one hand, we are sadly limited in our atten-
tion, our willpower, and our memory. Holding more than seven 26 unre-
lated numbers in our memories is too much for most of us to handle 
(Miller  1956 ), and within only a few hours after breakfast, our ability 
to make complex decisions is radically diminished (Danziger et al.  2011 ; 
Baumeister and Tierney  2011 ). On the other hand, we’re remarkably 
good at recognizing similar situations and judging them based on past 
experience in a blink of an eye, and at guessing whether something is right 
for us based on social cues—that is, using intuitive heuristics and our auto-
matic pattern recognition systems. 27 
 Wendel ( 2014 ) uses the CREATE model, below, to organize and 
understand the various cognitive limitations and biases that individuals 
may encounter. Each letter of the acronym represents an obstacle that 
individuals may face to taking action (like exercising), for which research-
ers have found potential behavioral nudges. Specifi cally (Fig.  1 ):
 Cue 
 Some techniques are designed simply to capture or retain our limited 
attention by cueing us to pay attention. 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 105
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 For example, asking people to take a survey about overdraft fees 
increases the salience of the fees in their minds and the attention they pay 
to them for up to two years—signifi cantly affecting behavior and decreas-
ing the fees individuals pay (Stango and Zinman  2011 ). 
 Other techniques to attract attention include reminders, visual con-
trast, movement, or embedding cues in our environment (like a wearable 
on our wrist reminding us to exercise). 
 Reaction 
 Other techniques are designed to work with our implicit (“fast”) decision- 
making system: how we  react to our environment and consumer products. 
 For example, researchers found that a sign posted near elevators 
informing viewers (correctly) that most people took the stairs increased 
stair usage by seven percentage points and had a continued effect even 
after the sign was removed (Burger and Shelton  2011 ). The technique, 
called social norms, builds on one of the most basic heuristics that people 
use when deciding what to do: do what most other people are doing. 28 
 Other techniques that can overcome obstacles in how people implic-
itly react to a product or action include personalized messaging, design 
 Fig. 1  The CREATE Model, a simple tool to remember the major cognitive 
limitations and biases that researchers have identifi ed. From Wendel (2014) 
 
106 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

that conveys professionalism and evokes trust, and designs that build 
on existing positive associations and emotions, for example, the use 
of fl ags to evoke patriotism and a sense of duty, as seen in President 
Obama’s (and many other candidates’) online platform asking for cam-
paign volunteers. 
 Evaluation 
 Researchers have also developed techniques that work through our 
deliberative (“slow”) decision-making system, and how we con-
sciously  evaluate the costs and benefi ts of an action. They may push 
us to think consciously instead of merely reacting, or try to work 
around our conscious minds’ fundamental limitations, like our limited 
mathematical skills. 
 For example, researchers worked with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
to design communications that would increase the usage of  free cash ben-
efi ts to low-income individuals via the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) 
program. They would do that by simplifying the information presented, and 
by clearly expressing the benefi ts of the program, they could signifi cantly 
increase uptake (Bhargava and Manoli  2013 ). 
 Other techniques include incentives highlighting that something is free, 
using a price comparison to show an item is “moderately priced,” priming 
a particular interpretation of the benefi ts of action, using competitions or 
social status to create additional (nonmonetary) incentives, or increasing 
monetary incentives to act; see Volpp et al. ( 2009 ) on how GE used cash 
incentives to encourage people to stop smoking. 
 Ability 
 Techniques designed simply to make it easier to act, or to boost our belief 
in our own ability to succeed at taking action (i.e., self-effi cacy). 
 For example, researchers ran an experiment with a private company’s 
fl u vaccination program, in which they asked workers to write down the 
specifi c time and day they would get vaccinated. Even though no penal-
ties were installed if people did not follow through, that simple request 
to make specifi c plans increased the vaccination rate by 4.2 percentage 
points (Milkman et al.  2011 ). This technique, known as implementation 
intentions, makes it easier to follow through because the cognitive “work” 
(when, how, etc.) has already been completed. 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 107
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Other techniques include removing frictions in the user interface like 
additional pages to click through or form fi elds to complete, using defaults, 
or decreasing the number of options involved in a complex choice. 
 Timing 
 Techniques designed to overcome our inherent tendencies to procrasti-
nate or ignore the nonurgent. 
 For example, researchers took photographs of participants and showed 
them an aged version of themselves to encourage them to save money 
for retirement; participants saved more than twice as much as a control 
group. The images helped people overcome the common tendency to 
procrastinate on retirement savings 29 and made the future (their future 
selves) more vivid and real (Hershfi eld et al.  2011 ). The technique was 
later applied by Merrill Lynch for the same purpose—retirement savings. 
 Other techniques include focusing on present benefi ts instead of future 
ones, using scarcity, or providing a focal date or deadline for action. 
 Experience 
 Techniques designed to overcome our vividness and availability biases in 
particular, and the overwhelming power of recent prior experiences (espe-
cially negative ones). 
 Techniques include avoiding associations with past (negative) experi-
ences by using different imagery and content, or intentionally linking to 
positive, loosely related prior experiences by creating a narrative that com-
bines the past and current actions (Wilson  2011 ). 
 The CREATE Model thus is one way in which we can identify and 
categorize the particular techniques that a company uses in its products; 
Wendel ( 2015 ) demonstrates how the model can be used as a checklist to 
audit a product design. 30 Even if we clearly understand what techniques 
are used, however, that does not mean that the techniques are actually 
effective—a question that we address next. 
 DO NUDGES IN CONSUMER PRODUCTS ACTUALLY WORK? 
 Naturally, every company that uses behavioral nudges in its products does 
so with the hope that the techniques actually work. Companies will often 
have anecdotal or correlational evidence about how users of their products 
108 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

have succeeded—at losing weight, eating better, and so on. The scientifi c 
evidence on whether their products, and the particular behavioral nudges 
they employ, in fact work is considerably less robust. 
 The gold standard for assessing impact is the randomized control trial 
(RCT), in which one set of randomly selected individuals receives the prod-
uct (or particular behavioral intervention within the product), another 
set does not, and outcomes are compared across the two groups (e.g., 
see Gerber and Green  2012 ). RCTs are the primary tool used to prove 
the effi cacy of pharmaceuticals (Junod  2014 ) and are increasingly used 
to measure impact in diverse realms, from political campaigns (Issenberg 
 2012 ) to international development (Karlan and Appel  2011 ). RCTs are 
also the behavioral scientist’s tool of choice to measure the impact of 
nudges on behavior, because of their rigor and because behavioral scien-
tists have learned that what people  say they do doesn’t necessarily align 
with what they actually do. 
 Behavioral nudges developed by academic researchers, by and large, 
have been tested and found to be effective via RCTs. A wide range of 
academic studies have shown the effi cacy of techniques from automating 
and streamlining the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA; 
Bettinger et  al.  2009 ) to peer groups for savings (Kast et  al.  2012 ). 
These are often accompanied—or buttressed—by theoretical models that 
attempt to explain  why people act that way, and how people make deci-
sions (see DellaVigna  2009 for a review). 
 When we look at how behavioral techniques are applied in consumer 
products, they fall into two broad categories. First, there are companies 
that employ RCTs to directly test the effi cacy of their specifi c consumer 
products and behavioral interventions. Opower is a notable leader in the 
fi eld, having subjected their interventions to numerous RCTs over time—
with initial, positive results that gained caveats and nuance over time. 31 In 
the initial accounts, Opower’s energy reports caused a reduction in energy 
usage of roughly 2 % (Allcott  2011 ). In addition to third-party academic 
studies, companies like HelloWallet conduct RCTs of their effectiveness 
(and have found positive results), often in partnership with third-party 
academics, but publish through popular press whitepapers (Fellowes and 
Spiegel  2015 ). 32 
 In the second category, many companies use  techniques that have been 
tested and validated in previous fi eld experiments, but do not test the 
particular implementation of those techniques in their own products. As 
noted above, Stickk.com uses commitment devices to encourage people 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 109
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

to follow through on their goals; commitment devices have been found to 
be effective in studies by Gine et al. ( 2010 ) and others. 33 Omada Health’s 
online Prevent product applies a clinically proven diabetes prevention pro-
gram ( 2014 ). The gamifi cation techniques used by Keas, the weight loss 
competitions of DietBet, the feedback and goal-setting techniques used 
by wearable products like FitBit, and many others all draw upon previously 
tested techniques. However, in these examples and many more, there do 
not appear to be any publicly accessible RCTs about their impact. 34 
 Unfortunately, it is not clear that impactful  techniques translate into 
impactful  products —in the next section, we examine why we should 
be cautious. 
 The Challenges of Implementing Behavioral Techniques 
in Products 
 When companies apply behavioral techniques that were tested in aca-
demic studies to their products, we have good reason to doubt that those 
techniques do, in fact, have the desired impact. The potential discon-
nect between proven techniques and unproven products occurs for four 
reasons:
 1.  The details matter. One of the core lessons of behavioral research is that 
the details matter immensely. Small changes in wording and presenta-
tion have outsized infl uence on behavior. Rarely are the precise imple-
mentations of techniques studied in the academic literature applied in 
consumer products. 35 
 2.  Untested user interfaces. Even if they  were applied precisely as intended, 
the rest of the user interface is often wildly different than the ones used 
in prior research. We know that seemingly irrelevant details of presen-
tation that are outside of the intended scope of the intervention, but 
nevertheless part of the product (like the questions asked of the user on 
prior screens), can infl uence behavior—by setting a numerical anchor 
that people base their answers on or priming people to think about a 
question in a particular manner. 
 3.  New contexts . The user interface is one part of a much larger change in 
context that occurs from (most) academic studies to their private sector 
implementations. Whereas most academic studies involved environ-
ments free of irrelevant distractions, the daily lives and environments of 
users for commercial products are quite the opposite—with distrac-
110 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

tions of family, work, and so on. It’s not clear what impact these addi-
tional demands on our cognitive resources have and how they might 
interact with a particular behavioral intervention. 
 4.  Uncertain generalizability. It’s unclear that impactful successful tech-
niques can be generalized even within their original context. Since each 
population is different, with its own personal experiences and patterned 
responses, it’s quite possible that what works with one population 
won’t work with another. Preliminary experimental evidence by 
HelloWallet, in which behavioral interventions like reminders were 
tested across diverse worker populations, indicates that nongeneraliz-
ability is quite common. 
 The result is that, without rigorous and specifi c testing, apart from 
a few cases, we simply don’t know whether specifi c products and their 
nudges actually work as promised. We can give them the benefi t of the 
doubt when they use experimentally tested techniques, but doubt should 
remain until actual evidence is gathered. It warrants notice that the same 
problems likely plague applications of behavioral techniques from the aca-
deme in public policy—without direct testing, we should doubt they actu-
ally work and are worth the effort. 
 A Way Out: How Companies Effectively Apply Nudges 
 The bright spot in impact testing, if it is to be called that, lies in the 
marketing realm. Marketing optimization specialists spend their careers 
specifi cally fi ne-tuning communications and materials for their impact 
on sales. The best of them rigorously use RCTs, also known as A/B or 
Split tests to measure the fi nal causal impact of a particular change in 
wording or design (see Hubspot  2015 ), aided by tools such as Adobe 
Target, Optimizely, Eloqua, or Apptimizer. While many of the results of 
these marketing experiments are kept private, you can fi nd a remarkable, 
and publically accessible, collection of hundreds of experimental tests at 
 WhichTestWon.com . 
 The marketing optimization process is straightforward, and we can 
learn the following lessons from these companies:
 1.  Identify potential changes to a product or communication that the com-
pany believes will improve performance. For example, changing the 
“call to action” (the specifi c request that is made of the user to do 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 111
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

something, usually on a clickable button), from “Learn More” to “Get 
Free Weight Loss Tips.” 
 2.  Experimentally test those changes on the smallest subset of the available 
population (or for the shortest time period) to get a clear statistical 
signal. For example, for traffi c to a website, devote 5 % of the traffi c for 
one month or 50 % of traffi c for a few days to the new call to action 
(“Get Free Weight Loss Tips”). 
 3.  Immediately apply the lessons to the rest of the population. 
 4.  Iterate , and test as many possible impactful changes as possible (repeat 
steps 1–3). For example, test the call to action, then the header, then 
the design, and then the time of day of the communication. Or, test all 
of them simultaneously—a technique known as multivariate testing 
(see Optimizely  2015 ). 
 5.  Invest in the technology to make that iterative process as inexpensive as 
possible, by using tools like Adobe Target where the design and execu-
tion of an experiment literally only requires dragging and dropping 
elements on a screen, without any technical or statistical knowledge. 
 In short, the solution to the problem that “we don’t know if techniques 
studied by researchers will work in a particular product” is simply to test 
it, and test as many as possible techniques as quickly and effi ciently as 
possible. It is from this approach that marketers have shown impact—in 
specifi c areas. 
 Where to Expect Impact 
 The marketing optimization process is effective (and has the experimental 
data to prove it), it works for a particular goal—driving sales. If there is 
a more general lesson to be learned about where behavioral techniques 
improve consumer outcomes (and we know they can do so), it is this: 
look wherever private sector incentives are aligned with the presumed 
 behavioral impact of the intervention on consumers, and wherever itera-
tive testing is possible. 
 In marketing optimization, incentives are aligned to drive sales—behav-
ioral interventions are deployed to increase click through rates, decrease 
disengagement, and drive more dollars to the company. Marketers also 
have powerful tools for iterative testing—as mentioned above. Outside 
of the marketing arena, those incentives aren’t as neatly aligned. No con-
sumer wearable technology company, for example, is paid based on the 
112 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 measured impact of its product. Rather, these companies drive sales based 
on the presumption of impact, which is a fundamentally different goal. 
It sadly means that applying behavioral techniques and marketing them 
heavily is often good enough. 36 Some companies choose to rigorously test 
and improve the impact of their products for the good of their end users, 
but those companies appear to be relatively rare. 
 Clearly then, impact remains one of the big open questions in the fi eld. 
We have answered the question “do behavioral nudges in consumer prod-
ucts (sometimes) work”: yes. We have also answered the question “do 
they (always) work”: no. The remaining question is simply one that we 
cannot answer in the abstract: “does a particular product and its behav-
ioral nudge work?” We know techniques that  can work, but, we’re never 
quite sure whether they actually do work in a particular context with a 
particular population until they have been experimentally tested there. 
 CONCLUSION 
 Over the last decade, we have witnessed the remarkable intersection of 
behavioral science and consumer products. A new crop of products explic-
itly uses behavioral “nudges” to help their users with diffi cult tasks—from 
dieting (MyFitnessPal) to exercising more (Jawbone) to improving their 
fi nances (HelloWallet). In fact, behavioral techniques have spread far 
beyond these obvious examples. Leading technology companies such as 
Facebook, Google, and Intuit have teams of behavioral scientists running 
experiments on user behavior, and nudges are increasingly at the center of 
modern digital marketing efforts (e.g., WhichTestWon). 
 As their use has become widespread, there has been remarkably little 
publicity 37 —until very recently with negative examples from Facebook 
and OKCupid (e.g., Meyer 2014; Wood  2014 ; Lupkin  2014 ). As these 
techniques grow in public awareness, naturally we should wonder: what 
exactly are these products doing, and do these techniques work? 
 With this chapter, we’ve traced the path that behavioral nudges have 
taken from the academy to consumer products in the fi eld:
•  Overall, nudges are reaching private sector products indirectly—
through popular books for product managers and designers; behav-
ioral scientists themselves rarely work on these products directly. 
•  Nudges are particularly prominent in the health and fi nance space, 
though examples can be found in wide ranging areas from energy 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 113
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

usage (Opower, Energy Joule) to driving behavior (Automatic, 
GreenRoad). 
•  We can categorize nudges according to the underlying behavioral 
biases and cognitive limitations they address—from inattention to 
innumeracy to procrastination—summarized by the CREATE model 
(cue-reaction-evaluation-ability-timing-experience). 
•  We should be skeptical that behavioral nudges will work the same (or 
at all) once they are translated from an academic environment into 
consumer products, because of core lessons in the behavioral litera-
ture itself—that the details of implementation and decision-making 
context matter immensely. 
•  While a few companies have subjected their products and behavioral 
nudges to rigorous RCTs, most companies appear to rely on previ-
ously published research about the techniques and have not directly 
tested them as expressed in their products. 
•  In one domain, there is diligent and thoughtful attention to the 
impact of behavioral nudges and how to improve them—digital mar-
keting optimization. In the digital marketing realm, incentives align 
to iteratively develop and test nudges in the fi eld. 
•  Outside of marketing, we can learn from the optimization process 
and overcome the challenges of applying academic nudges to con-
sumer products by following the methods of marketers: clear out-
come metrics, rigorous testing, and rapid iteration. 
 Behavioral nudges in consumer products are still quite new, and we 
still have a great deal to learn about their impact, best uses, and dangers. 
Exciting times are ahead. 
 NOTES 
 1. Vitality’s Glowcaps. See  http://www.vitality.net/glowcaps.html 
 2. Opower generates such a report. See  http://opower.com/solutions/
energy-effi ciency 
 3. See Goel ( 2014 ) 
 4. For example, Microsoft was conducting 200 concurrent experiments 
per day on the Bing site in 2013 (Kohavi et al.  2013 ). See also 
 WhichTestWon.com , a repository of the results of such online digital 
experiments. 
114 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 5. There appears to be no conclusive data about the size of the fi eld, but 
we do have proxies that give us orders of magnitude. As of 2012, 
there were 16,900 economists of all types employed in the USA, 
roughly 45% of whom work for government (and are thus unlikely to 
consult in the private sector) (BLS 2015a), and behavioral economists 
are a small subset of economists. By comparison, there were over 
1000 attendees for a single (digital) interaction designer conference 
in 2015, Interaction2015, featuring speakers like Opower’s Rosen on 
how to apply behavioral techniques to design (IxDA 2015). There are 
also over 259,000 graphic designers in the USA, though the subset of 
whom apply nudges is unclear (BLS 2015b). 
 6. See, for example, Carnegie Mellon’s Bachelor of Design program. 
 7. Based on interviews for this book chapter and two prior books on the 
topic (Wendel 2013, 2014). 
 8. This author also hosts such workshops (SXSW  2014 ). 
 9. See  http://www.actiondesigner.net/;  http://www.meetup.com/
habitdesign/; 
 http://www.meetup.com/London-behavioural-
comms-monthly-informal-drinks/ . Note: This author is the president 
of the nonprofi t Action Design Network. 
 10. See  http://www.bjfogg.com/how.html;  http://irrationallabs.org/
work-with-us/;  http://www.slimbydesign.org/contact/ 
 11. See  http://www.ideas42.org/;  http://tgggroup.com /;  http://
behaviouralinsights.co.uk / 
 12. See  http://www.ogilvychange.com/;  http://www.brainjuicer.com/; 
 http://www.instituteofdecisionmaking.com/our-team/ 
 13. Loss aversion refers to the tendency of people to strongly prefer (and 
expend effort) to avoid losing something that they already have to 
gaining something of equivalent value. In a nudge that uses loss aver-
sion, a company might frame inaction as losing out, rather than fram-
ing action as a gain. For example, describing a trip to the gym as not 
losing the money one’s spent on the gym, rather than gaining the 
value from it. 
 14. Estimates vary wildly in terms of growth of the sector; but major 
reports from Juniper, ABI, and Business Intelligence all show rapid 
growth from 2010 onward (Business Insider 2013). GfK, for exam-
ple, estimated that 17.6 million smartwatches and health and fi tness 
bands were sold worldwide in 2014 (see GfK 2015). 
 15. Goal setting: See, for example, Locke et al. (1981), Locke and Latham 
(2002). Feedback: See Kluger and DeNisi (1996) and Hattie and 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 115
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Timperley (2007), noting that feedback can have a positive or nega-
tive impact depending on the design. Peer effects: See Smith and 
Christakis (2008) or Christakis and Fowler (2007) on the similarly 
two-sided nature of peer effects and health. 
 16. See  http://www.glowcaps.com/ . Glowcaps, along with other inter-
ventions, are currently being studied in a randomized controlled fi eld 
trial for their effectiveness: see ClinicalTrials.gov ( 2015 ). 
 17. Author search on April 25, 2015, based on counting the apps under 
the “health & fi tness: weight loss” category and by searching for the 
word “diet” in the App Store. 
 18. See  SlimByDesign.org , for example. Wansink is developing a mobile 
application as well (Wansink 2015a). 
 19. This is an application of just in time decision-making aids, promoted 
by researchers such as Daniel Fernandes and John Lynch (Fernandes 
et al. 2014). 
 20. The author currently works at Morningstar and leads the behavioral 
science team there. 
 21. The author previously worked at HelloWallet and led their behavioral 
science efforts. 
 22. See Steverman (2014) for a quick survey of 11 products applying 
behavioral nudges to fi nancial behavior. 
 23. See  http://www.poverty-action.org/ushouseholdfi nance/projects 
 24. See   http://www.cfsinnovation.com/Financial-Capability-Innovation-
Funds.aspx 
 25. Or, an older tradition of analysis seen in Elster’s aptly named book, 
 Ulysses Unbound (2000). 
 26. Or perhaps as little as four (Cowan 2010) 
 27. See Kahneman’s  Thinking ,  Fast and Slow (2011) and Malcolm 
Gladwell’s  Blink (2005). The fi rst is a detailed look at our automatic 
(fast) thinking and the latter is a lighter read. 
 28. Another often-cited example comes from the Behavioural Insights 
Team (then part the UK government), which employed a simple nor-
mative message: “9 out of 10 people in your town pay their tax on 
time.” See Behavioural Insights Team (2012). 
 29. And the inherent lack of urgency: it does not matter if one starts sav-
ing more on a given day or a day later. It only matters when we pro-
crastinate repeatedly. 
 30. See Cugleman (2015) for another useful way to “audit” the behav-
ioral techniques used in products. 
116 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 31. See Allcott (2011) and Ayres et al. (2012) for two of the RCTs on 
Opower with positive results. See Allcott (2012) for a caveat. 
 32. Additional academic publications are in press or under development. 
 33. See Bryan et al. (2010) for more information on Commitment 
Devices, and  Stickk.com for the particular product. 
 34. Nor, based on private discussion with companies in the fi eld, do most 
companies run nonpublic RCTs on their products. 
 35. This problem is not unique to behavioral nudges, of course. As 
Abdukadirov discusses earlier in this volume building on Hippel 
(2006), the implementer of an idea may not have all of the “sticky” 
knowledge required to be effective—the small details that undermine 
effectiveness if ignored or not transferred effectively. 
 36. One could argue that if a product is not effective at impacting user 
behavior (in a benefi cial way, beyond simply sales), then users would 
stop buying it (i.e., that the ultimate test of impact is market success). 
That is a testable hypothesis—but one that the history of diet fads and 
get rich quick schemes would seem to contradict. Humans are very 
good at weaving stories of success out of random noise—also known 
as the narrative bias. 
 37. Brief articles about selected techniques have appeared in major news-
papers (Simon 2010) and magazines (Olson 2015).  Designing for 
Behavior Change (Wendel 2014) provides a limited overview of com-
mercial applications but does not attempt to provide a comprehensive 
look across industries. In addition,  Seductive Interaction Design 
(Anderson 2011) and  Evil by Design (Nodder 2013) provide many 
examples of behavioral science applied to consumer products but 
focus particularly on the UX design issues. 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Albergotti, Reed. 2014. Facebook experiments had few limits.  Wall Street 
Journal , July 2, sec. Tech. http://www.wsj.com/articles/facebook-experiments-
had-few-limits-1404344378 
 Allcott, Hunt.  2011. Social norms and energy conservation.  Journal of Public 
Economics 95(9–10): 1082–1095. 
 ———. 2012. Site selection bias in program evaluation. Working paper. National 
Bureau of Economic Research, September.  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18373 
 American Library Association. 2015. Number employed in libraries, April.  http://
www.ala.org/tools/libfactsheets/alalibraryfactsheet02 . Accessed 1 May 2015. 
 Anderson, Stephen. 2013. Mental notes card deck.  http://getmentalnotes.com / 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 117
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Ariely, Dan.  2008.  Predictably irrational: The hidden forces that shape our decisions . 
New York: HarperCollins. 
 Ayres, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih. 2012. Evidence from two large fi eld 
experiments that peer comparison feedback can reduce residential energy usage. 
 Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 29(5): 992–1022. 
 Baumeister, Roy F., and John Tierney. 2011.  Willpower: Rediscovering the greatest 
human strength . New York, NY: Penguin Press. 
 Behavioural Insights Team. 2012. Applying behavioural insights to reduce fraud, 
error and debt.  Cabinet Offi ce , London. 
 Bettinger, Eric P., Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopoulos, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 
2009. The role of simplifi cation and information in college decisions: Results 
from the H&R block FAFSA experiment. Working paper. National Bureau of 
Economic Research, September.  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15361 
 Bhargava, Saurabh, and Dayanand Manoli. 2015. “Psychological frictions and the 
incomplete take-up of social benefi ts: Evidence from an IRS fi eld experiment.” 
 The American Economic Review 105(11): 3489–3529. 
 Blanding, Michael. 2014. The business of behavioral economics.  Forbes , August 
11. 
 http://www.forbes.com/sites/hbsworkingknowledge/2014/08/11/
the-business-of-behavioral-economics/ 
 Bond, Robert M., Christopher J.  Fariss, Jason J.  Jones, Adam D.I.  Kramer, 
Cameron Marlow, Jaime E. Settle, and James H. Fowler.  2012. A 61-million- 
person experiment in Social infl uence and political mobilization.  Nature 
489(7415): 295–298. 
 Brown, Marie T., and Jennifer K. Bussell.  2011. Medication adherence: WHO 
cares?  Mayo Clinic Proceedings 86(4): 304–314. 
 Bryan, Gharad, Dean Karlan, and Scott Nelson.  2010. Commitment devices. 
 Annual Review of Economics 2(1): 671–698. 
 Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2015a. Economists : Occupational outlook handbook: 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.  http://www.bls.gov/ooh/life-physical-and- 
social-science/economists.htm 
 ———. 2015b. Graphic designers: Occupational outlook handbook: U.S. Bureau 
of 
Labor 
Statistics. 
 http://www.bls.gov/ooh/arts-and-design/graphic- 
designers.htm 
 Burger, Jerry M., and Martin Shelton.  2011. Changing everyday health behaviors 
through descriptive norm manipulations.  Social Infl uence 6(2): 69–77. 
 Business Insider. 2013. CHART: Just how big will the new mobile market for wear-
able devices become?  Business Insider Australia , April 30.  http://www.busines-
sinsider.com.au/how-big-will-mobile-market-for-wearable-devices-2013-4 
 Christakis, Nicholas A., and James H. Fowler.  2007. The spread of obesity in a 
large social network over 32 years.  New England Journal of Medicine 357(4): 
370–379. 
 ClinicalTrials.gov. 2015. GlowCaps adherence randomized control trial, February 
27.  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01756001 
118 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Cowan, Nelson.  2010. The magical mystery four: How is working memory capac-
ity limited, and why?  Current Directions in Psychological Science 19(1): 51–57. 
 Cugelman, Brian. 2015. Psychology for digital behavior change. Workshop toolkit. 
 http://www.alterspark.com/training/psychology-for-digital-behavior-change .
Accessed 9 Oct 2015. 
 Danova. 2015. THE WEARABLES REPORT: Growth trends, consumer atti-
tudes, and why smartwatches will dominate.  Business Insider .  http://www.
businessinsider.com/the-wearable-computing-market-report-2014-10 . 
Accessed 25 Apr 2015. 
 Danziger, Shai, Jonathan Levav, and Liora Avnaim-Pesso.  2011. Extraneous fac-
tors in judicial decisions.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
108(17): 6889–6892. 
 Dayer, Lindsey, Seth Heldenbrand, Paul Anderson, Paul O. Gubbins, and Bradley 
C. Martin.  2013. Smartphone medication adherence apps: Potential benefi ts 
to patients and providers.  Journal of the American Pharmacists Association: 
JAPhA 53(2): 172–181. 
 DellaVigna, S.  2009. Psychology and economics: Evidence from the fi eld.  Journal 
of Economic Literature 47(2): 315–372. 
 Egan, Brian. 2015. Interview with Brian Egan. Phone, March 27. 
 Elster, Jon.  2000.  Ulysses unbound: Studies in rationality, precommitment, and 
constraints . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Fabricant, Robert. 2010. Design with intent. Design observer, September 11. 
 http://designobserver.com/feature/design-with-intent/14338 
 Fellowes, Matt, and Jake Spiegel. 2015.  Financial wellness — The future of work . 
 http://www.hellowallet.com/research/fi nancial-wellness-future-work/ 
 Fernandes, Daniel, John G. Lynch, and Richard G. Netemeyer.  2014. Financial 
literacy, fi nancial education, and downstream fi nancial behaviors.  Management 
Science 60(8): 1861–1883. 
 Fogg, BJ. 2009. A behavior model for persuasive design.  Proceedings of the 4th 
International Conference on Persuasive Technology , 40: 1–40: 7. Persuasive ’09. 
New York: ACM. 
 Gerber, Alan S., and Donald P. Green.  2012.  Field experiments: Design, analysis, 
and interpretation . New York: W. W. Norton. 
 GfK. 2015. Gfk forecasts 51 million wearables will be bought globally in 2015, 
March 2.  http://www.gfk.com/news-and-events/press-room/press-releases/
pages/gfk-forecasts-51-million-wearables-sold-globally-2015.aspx 
 Giné, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman.  2010. Put your money where 
your butt is: A commitment contract for smoking cessation.  American Economic 
Journal: Applied Economics 2(4): 213–235. 
 Gladwell, Malcolm.  2005.  Blink: The power of thinking without thinking , 1st edn. 
New York: Little, Brown and Company. 
 Goel, Vindu. 2014. Facebook tinkers with users’ emotions in news feed experi-
ment, stirring outcry.  The New  York Times , June 29.  http://www.nytimes.
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 119
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

com/2014/06/30/technology/facebook-tinkers-with-users-emotions-in-
news-feed-experiment-stirring-outcry.html 
 Hattie, John, and Helen Timperley.  2007. The power of feedback.  Review of 
Educational Research 77(1): 81–112. 
 Hershfi eld, Hal E., Daniel G. Goldstein, William F. Sharpe, Jesse Fox, Leo Yeykelis, 
Laura L. Carstensen, and Jeremy N. Bailenson.  2011. Increasing saving behav-
ior through age-progressed renderings of the future self.  Journal of Marketing 
Research 48(SPL): S23–S37. 
 Hippel, Eric von.  2006.  Democratizing innovation . Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press. 
 Hubspot. 2015. An introduction to using A/B testing for marketing optimiza-
tion. Whitepaper.  http://cdn2.hubspot.net/hub/53/fi le-13221855-pdf/
docs/ebooks/introduction_to_ab_testing_for_marketing_optimization.pdf 
 Interaction Design Association. 2015. Interaction15 schedule.  http://interac-
tion15.sched.org/directory/attendees/1 . Accessed 1 May 2015. 
 Issenberg, Sasha. 2012. Obama does it better.  Slate , October 29.  http://www.
slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/victory_lab/2012/10/obama_s_
secret_weapon_democrats_have_a_massive_advantage_in_targeting_and.sin-
gle.html 
 Junod, Suzanne White. 2014. Overviews on FDA history—FDA and clinical drug 
trials: A short history. WebContent, July 7.  http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/
WhatWeDo/History/Overviews/ucm304485.htm 
 Kahneman, Daniel.  2011.  Thinking, fast and slow , 1st edn. Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux: New York. 
 Kaiser Family Foundation. 2015. Total professionally active physicians, March. 
 http://kff.org/other/state-indicator/total-active-physicians/ 
 Karlan, Dean, and Jacob Appel.  2011.  More than good intentions: Improving the 
ways the world’s poor borrow, save, farm, learn, and stay healthy . New  York: 
Penguin. 
 Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman. 
2011. Getting to the top of mind: How reminders increase saving. National 
Bureau of Economic Research working paper.  http://www.dartmouth.
edu/~jzinman/Papers/Top%20of%20Mind%202011jan.pdf 
 Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz. 2012. Under-savers anonymous: 
Evidence on self-help groups and peer pressure as a savings commitment device. 
Working paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, September.  http://
www.nber.org/papers/w18417 
 Keas. 2015. Keas launches health management platform to integrate health bene-
fi ts.  Reuters , March 18.  http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/03/18/keas-
launches- idUSnPn8nxMtR+85+PRN20150318 
 Kluger, Avraham N., and Angelo DeNisi.  1996. The effects of feedback interven-
tions on performance: A historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary 
feedback intervention theory.  Psychological Bulletin 119(2): 254–284. 
120 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Kohavi, Ron, Alex Deng, Brian Frasca, Toby Walker, Ya Xu, and Nils Pohlmann. 
2013. Online controlled experiments at large scale.  Proceedings of the 19th 
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining 1168–1176. KDD ’13. New York: ACM. 
 Kosner, Anthony Wing. 2012. Weight watchers 360: Mobile apps can break hard 
habits with easy-to-follow steps.  Forbes , December 27.  http://www.forbes.
com/sites/anthonykosner/2012/12/17/weight-watchers-360-mobile-apps-can-
break-hard-habits-with-easy-to-follow- steps/ 
 Kramer, Adam D.  I., Jamie E.  Guillory, and Jeffrey T.  Hancock.  2014. 
Experimental evidence of massive-scale emotional contagion through social 
networks.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111(24): 
8788–8790. 
 Kuang, Cliff. 2012. In the cafeteria, google gets healthy.  Fast Company , March 19. 
 http://www.fastcompany.com/1822516/cafeteria-google-gets-healthy 
 Kwong, Kelvin. 2015. A smart coach by your side.  The Jawbone Blog , January 28. 
 https://jawbone.com/blog/smart-coach-side/ . Accessed 1 May 2015 
 Locke, Edwin A., and Gary P. Latham.  2002. Building a practically useful theory 
of goal setting and task motivation: A 35-year Odyssey.  American Psychologist 
57(9): 705–717. 
 Locke, Edwin A., Karyll N. Shaw, Lise M. Saari, and Gary P. Latham.  1981. Goal 
setting and task performance: 1969–1980.  Psychological Bulletin 90(1): 
125–152. 
 Lockton, Daniel. 2013. Design with intent: A design pattern toolkit for environmen-
tal and social behaviour change. Thesis, Brunel University School of Engineering 
and Design PhD theses.  http://dspace.brunel.ac.uk/handle/2438/7546 
 Lupkin, Sydney. 2014. You consented to Facebook’s social experiment.  ABC 
News , June 30.  http://abcnews.go.com/Health/consented-facebooks-social- 
experiment/story?id=24368579 
 Maniago, Vince. 2015. Invisible steps: Behavioral economics driving design. 
 http://www.slideshare.net/IntuitInc/invisible-steps-behavioral-economics-
driving- design . Accessed 1 May 2015. 
 Meyer, Robinson. 2010. Everything we know about Facebook’s secret mood 
manipulation experiment, June 28.  http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/
archive/2014/06/everything-we-know-about-facebooks-secret-mood-
manipulation- experiment/373648/ 
 Milkman, Katherine L., John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte 
C.  Madrian.  2011. Using implementation intentions prompts to enhance 
infl uenza vaccination rates.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
108(26): 10415–10420. 
 Miller, George.  1956. The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits 
on our capacity for processing information.  The Psychological Review 63: 81–97. 
 Morningstar. 2015. Morningstar behavioral science advisory board.  http://cor-
porate1.morningstar.com/Behavioral-Science-Advisory-Board/ 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 121
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Nodder, Chris. 2013.  Evil by design :  Interaction design to lead us into temptation . 
Indianapolis: Wiley.  http://site.ebrary.com/id/10716209 
 Omada Health. 2014.  The prevent online Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) , 
November.  https://go.omadahealth.com 
 Optimizely. 2015. What is multivariate testing?.  https://www.optimizely.com/
resources/multivariate-testing/ 
 Petakov, Artem. 2015. Interview with Artem Petakov. Phone, April 1. 
 Redström, Johan. 2006. Persuasive design: Fringes and foundations. In  Persuasive 
technology , eds. Wijnand A. IJsselsteijn, Yvonne A. W. de Kort, Cees Midden, 
Berry Eggen, and Elise van den Hoven, 112–122. Lecture notes in computer 
science, vol. 3962. Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg.  http://link.springer.com/
chapter/10.1007/11755494_17 
 Richards, Tim. 2015. The big list of behavioral biases.  http://www.psyfi tec.
com/p/the-big-list-of-behavioral-biases.html . Accessed 1 May 2015. 
 Ryan, Richard M., and Edward L. Deci.  2000. Self-determination theory and the 
facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. 
 American Psychologist 55(1): 68–78. 
 Smith, Kirsten P., and Nicholas A. Christakis.  2008. Social networks and health. 
 Annual Review of Sociology 34(1): 405–429. 
 Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman. 2011. Limited and varying consumer atten-
tion: Evidence from shocks to the salience of bank overdraft fees. NBER working 
paper.  http://www.dartmouth.edu/~jzinman/Papers/SZ_LimitedAttention_
Overdrafts_2011apr_wp.pdf 
 Steverman, Ben. 2014. Manipulate me: The booming business in behavioral 
fi nance.  Bloomberg.com , April 7.  http://www.bloomberg.com/news/arti-
cles/2014-04-07/manipulate-me-the-booming-business-in-behavioral-fi nance 
 SXSW Interactive. 2014. Session signup: How to design products for behavior 
change.  http://sup.sxsw.com/presenters/stephen_wendel.html 
 Thaler, Richard H.. 2005.  Advances in behavioral fi nance. Volume II . Illustrated 
edition. Princeton University Press. 
 Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein.  2008.  Nudge: Improving decisions about 
health, wealth, and happiness . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: 
Heuristics and biases.  Science .  http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/
978-94-010-1834-0_8 
 Volpp, Kevin G., George Loewenstein, Andrea B. Troxel, Jalpa Doshi, Maureen 
Price, Mitchell Laskin, and Stephen E. Kimmel.  2008. A test of fi nancial incen-
tives to improve warfarin adherence.  BMC Health Services Research 8(1): 272. 
 Volpp, Kevin G., Andrea B. Troxel, Mark V. Pauly, Henry A. Glick, Andrea Puig, 
David A. Asch, Robert Galvin, et al.  2009. A randomized, controlled trial of 
fi nancial incentives for smoking cessation.  New England Journal of Medicine 
360(7): 699–709. 
122 
S. WENDEL
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Wansink, Brian. 2015a. Interview with Brian Wansink. Phone, April 1. 
 ———. 2015b.  Slim by design . Presented at the Action Design DC, March 23. 
 Wendel, Stephen.  2013.  Designing for behavior change: Applying psychology and 
behavioral economics , 1st edn. Sebastopol, California: O’Reilly Media. 
 ———.  2014.  Improving employee benefi ts: Why employees fail to use their benefi ts 
and how behavioral economics can help . Washington, DC: Longfellow Press. 
 ———. 2015. Workshop slides and booklet.  Action Design .  http://actiondesign.
hellowallet.com/workshop-slides-booklet/ . Accessed 9 Oct 2015. 
 Wilson, Timothy D.  2011.  Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological 
change , 1st edn. New York: Little, Brown and Company. 
 Wood, Molly. 2014. OKCupid plays with love in user experiments.  The New York 
Times , 
July 
28, 
 http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/29/technology/
okcupid- publishes-fi ndings-of-user-experiments.html 
BEHAVIORAL NUDGES AND CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY 123
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

125
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_6
 Private-Sector Nudging: The Good, 
the Bad, and the Uncertain 
 Jodi   N.   Beggs 
 Behavioral economics has increased dramatically in popularity over the last 
decade. Not surprisingly, academic researchers have expressed signifi cant 
interest in this (relatively) new line of inquiry, but behavioral economics 
has also received a disproportionate amount of attention from outside 
of the academic community. For example, policy makers have embraced 
behavioral economics as a way to understand how people’s actions deviate 
from their long-term best interests and, as a result, how governments can 
mandate changes to consumers’ choice architectures in order to “nudge” 
them toward greater long-term happiness. In addition, marketers have 
(knowingly or unknowingly) embraced behavioral economics as a way to 
exploit consumers’ decision-making biases in order to increase profi tability. 
 Anyone who has ever watched a typical late-night infomercial is famil-
iar with this phenomenon—it’s not a coincidence that the host asks if 
you would pay $200 for the new state-of-the-art whatchamajig and then 
proceeds to work his way down to the actual price of $19.99. Instead, the 
infomercial writers know that, by setting an initial high anchor price for 
the viewer to consider, the tactic causes viewers to be willing to pay more 
for the item than they would otherwise. Similarly, have you ever stopped 
 J. N.  Beggs () 
 Northeastern University ,  Boston ,  MA ,  USA 
 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

to consider why so many companies offer free shipping when shipping 
is obviously not free to provide? Perhaps it’s because people will buy far 
more than $5 of stuff that they wouldn’t have bought otherwise in order 
to qualify for the irrationally attractive free shipping (known to behavioral 
economists, appropriately, as “FREE!” shipping 1 ) rather than pay $5 for 
shipping. 
 As behavioral economists uncover and document more ways in which 
individuals are biased in their decision-making, both marketers and pol-
icy makers get more ways to nudge consumers in various directions. One 
common perception is that policy makers nudge consumers toward their 
long-term best interests and marketers nudge consumers away from their 
long-term best interests, usually by manipulating consumers into buying 
more than they would if they were being economically rational. In fact, 
nudge pioneers Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein assert that “the key 
point here is that for all their virtues, markets often give companies a strong 
incentive to cater to (and profi t from) human frailties, rather than try to 
eradicate them or to minimize their effects.” 2 But is this always the case? 
 There is obviously a signifi cant incentive for private producers (i.e. com-
panies that sell goods and services to consumers) to implement nudges 
that improve their bottom lines. These nudges that are profi table for pro-
ducers could, in turn, be either good or bad for consumers, or they could 
even be good for some consumers and bad for others. Furthermore, there 
is some opportunity for entrepreneurs to either “sell” nudges directly to 
consumers or to get into the business of helping producers implement 
effective nudges. That said, it’s important to recognize that there are limi-
tations on the ability (or, perhaps more accurately, willingness) of private 
markets to provide nudges that are helpful for consumers and, conversely, 
to refrain from providing nudges that are harmful to consumers. In some 
of these cases, policy makers have the incentive and ability to step in and 
implement nudges that are societally productive, but it should also be 
noted that governments face many of the same incentives and logistical 
limitations that prevent private enterprise from implementing nudges that 
increase consumers’ long-term happiness. 
 NUDGING BY PRODUCERS 
 One of the main economic premises of private fi rms is that they operate so 
as to maximize profi t. 3 Realistically, it’s probably unreasonable to assume 
that fi rms are perfect profi t maximizers in all cases, but the notion that 
126 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

fi rms are likely to undertake initiatives that add to a fi rm’s profi t and avoid 
initiatives that subtract from it is likely a pretty accurate general guide to 
fi rm behavior. As such, we can expect that the types of nudges that fi rms 
choose to implement are those that are profi table for the fi rm itself. Note, 
however, that we can’t assume that fi rms will implement all nudges that 
may be profi table (or avoid all nudges that reduce profi t), since a fi rm 
might not be aware that such a nudge exists or may have logistical consid-
erations that prevent it from implementing an otherwise profi table nudge. 
 It’s intuitively appealing to assume that nudges that are profi table for 
fi rms are bad for consumers, but this is not necessarily the case. “Benefi cial 
nudges” (i.e. those that are in consumers’ long-term best interests) are 
consistent with profi t maximization when the company’s incentives are 
aligned with the desires of the individuals’ long-term selves—in other 
words, when companies want to sell more and consumers’ long-term 
selves know that they should consume more, or when companies want 
consumers to use less of a product and consumers’ long-term selves know 
that they should curb their consumption. In keeping with economic ter-
minology, let’s refer to a nudge that is both profi t maximizing for produc-
ers and long-term utility maximizing for consumers as a “Pareto nudge.” 4 
(Note that Pareto nudges are a subset of benefi cial nudges.) Again, in 
keeping with economic terminology, we can also refer to nudges that are 
bad for consumers’ long-term utility but good for producers as “rent- 
seeking nudges.” 5 Using these defi nitions, we can categorize nudges that 
are profi table for private producers as either Pareto nudges or rent-seeking 
nudges. 
 Pareto Nudges 
 Despite the popular conception that there is a universal tension between 
the incentives of marketers and the well-being of consumers, it’s not actu-
ally that diffi cult to fi nd examples where companies use the principles of 
behavioral economics to not only enhance their profi tability but also bet-
ter align consumers with their long-term best interests. Let’s examine a 
few categories of such Pareto nudges in order to understand how they 
work and in what contexts they tend to appear. 
 Savings Nudges 
 Many households report not saving enough, whether it be for retirement, 
for large purchases, or to cover unexpected fi nancial needs. While lack of 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 127
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

fi nancial resources does contribute to this situation in many cases, behav-
ioral economists suggest that the tendency to procrastinate also plays a 
role—our desire for immediate gratifi cation tends to tell us that it’s opti-
mal to start saving tomorrow rather than today, but our time- inconsistent 
preferences 6 suggest that the same is true when tomorrow becomes today! 
 It’s therefore pretty clear that the long-term best interests of many con-
sumers are well served by programs that encourage them to save more. 
What companies, then, have incentives that align with these consumers’ 
best interests? Most likely not those organizations that are trying to get 
consumers to spend more (unless perhaps they sell products to retirees 
and take a very long-term view of their business). Instead, let’s take a look 
at those organizations that benefi t when consumers save more—fi nancial 
institutions and, in some cases, employers. 
 Financial institutions benefi t when consumers increase their saving 
because this saving is what creates demand for the products that the fi nan-
cial institutions offer. Employers benefi t when employees save more when 
such saving takes place via higher 401(k) contributions. Why is this the 
case? Conventional wisdom suggests that participating in an employer- 
sponsored 401(k) program (as opposed to just being given cash compen-
sation) makes employees feel more attached to their employer, thereby 
increasing productivity and reducing turnover. From a legal and taxa-
tion standpoint, however, the incentives are much more clear—in order 
to have a 401(k) program classifi ed as “nondiscriminatory,” which pre-
vents higher-earning employees from having part of their contributions 
subject to taxation, companies must show that 401(k) contributions are 
not too skewed toward the higher-earning employees in the organiza-
tion. 7 It is fairly typical for companies to make contributions on behalf of 
lower- earning employees in order to meet the nondiscriminatory require-
ment when necessary, so increasing overall participation in the employer’s 
401(k) program is often viewed as a cost-saving measure, even when an 
employer match is present. 
 “Keep the Change” Programs 
 Around 2005, in order to generate demand for savings accounts and debit 
card transactions, Bank of America introduced a program called “Keep 
the Change.” This program rounds consumers’ debit card transactions up 
to the next dollar, and then deposits the “change” into consumers’ sav-
ings accounts. To sweeten the deal, Bank of America matches consumers’ 
savings deposits 100 % for the fi rst three months and then 5 % thereafter, 
128 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

up to $250 per year. 8 Since then, other banks have followed suit with 
similar programs. 
 In its fi rst two years, Bank of America customers saved $400 million 
via the Keep the Change program. 9 (Note however, that some of this 
amount could have replaced other amounts that the consumers would 
have saved, but the fi gure most likely represents a net increase in saving.) 
This change in behavior can be explained by a number of behavioral eco-
nomics principles:
•  Narrow choice bracketing 10 and the “peanuts principle”: Taken one 
at a time, none of the savings amounts generated by the program 
seem signifi cant to the consumer, whereas a one-time savings amount 
of a more considerable sum would likely remind the consumer of 
what she was giving up in order to save. Therefore, by framing the 
saving as a bunch of small amounts that, individually, wouldn’t have 
been able to purchase anything of note anyway, such a behavior is 
less painful to the consumer. 
•  Mental accounting 11 : Since customers can freely (and basically imme-
diately nowadays) transfer funds between their checking and savings 
accounts, the money in these accounts is fungible from a rational 
standpoint. Many individuals, on the other hand, assign some psy-
chological signifi cance to money being in the savings account rather 
than the checking account and are therefore more likely to not spend 
the money when it’s labeled as being in the savings account, even 
when this distinction is mostly artifi cial. 
 This market-based nudge appears to be pretty solidly in the best inter-
ests of consumers, especially since the program requires consumers to 
actively sign up for the program. (One drawback worth noting, how-
ever, is that some consumers have experienced issues with overdraft fees 
that they attribute to the program.) The downside of this active sign-up 
requirement, of course, is that consumers need to be self-aware regarding 
their need to be nudged (or have enough desire for the match incentive) 
in order to take the trouble to sign up, and the choice architecture of the 
decision of whether or not to enroll is biased in favor of not enrolling 
since that is the default option for the consumer. (This of course could be 
changed, and many consumers would likely benefi t, but that doesn’t mean 
that they won’t complain in the short term.) Fortunately, the presence 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 129
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

of the match incentive likely gets at least some consumers to sign up for 
 non-nudge-related reasons. 
 401(k) Default Enrollment 
 Much has been made in academia, in the media, and in business of the 
effects of defaults on employee 401(k) participation. In one landmark 
fi eld study, employee 401(k) participation was shown to increase from 
less than 50 % to almost 90 % as a result of simply switching from a sys-
tem where employees had to actively opt in to the 401(k) program (via a 
short process that was not intended to be burdensome) to a system where 
employers were enrolled in the program by default but could opt out by 
completing a short form. 12 In another analysis, 401(k) participation rates 
were shown to be higher when employees are given fewer choices of plans 
to pick from. 13 (Note that this is technically more than a nudge if consum-
ers’ choices are forcibly limited, which is why some organizations present 
a few choices as the default but have more options available for those who 
want to consider all of them.) Behavioral economists are not shocked that 
such nudges work, since they are in line with fundamental principles in 
the fi eld:
•  Status-quo bias 14 : Experimental evidence suggests that people tend 
to view new options in comparison to their current situations—that 
is, the status quo. Furthermore, people tend to be loss averse, mean-
ing that they dislike losses more than they like equivalent gains, and 
therefore weight losses in the decision-making process more than is 
rational. Because the downsides of moving away from the status quo 
are weighted more than the upsides, consumers are biased toward 
sticking with the scenario that they perceive as being the status quo. 
By setting a default option, the 401k plan managers are instilling a 
psychological (though somewhat arbitrary) status quo in the minds 
of consumers, and their ultimate choices are biased toward that ini-
tial status quo. 
•  Overchoice 15 (aka the Paradox of Choice): If consumers were ratio-
nal computational robots, adding more options couldn’t make them 
worse off—after all, the worst-case scenario would be that they don’t 
like the new option and therefore don’t choose it. In reality, how-
ever, consumers can get overwhelmed by too many choices (theo-
retically because they worry about making a suboptimal choice when 
the choice is diffi cult), and this frustration can prevent them from 
130 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

making a decision at all. By limiting the number of available options, 
the plan designers decreased the amount of potential frustration and 
encouraged more people to make a choice rather than to balk at the 
program. 
 As a result of these initial studies, many companies have adopted 
policies for default 401(k) enrollment (often on the recommendation 
of human resources and retirement program consultants), and agencies 
such as the Department of Labor provide materials that advise businesses 
on how to implement automatic enrollment in their organizations. As 
a related nudge, human resources consulting fi rm Aon Hewitt offers a 
Quick Enrollment TM product that provides a simplifi ed choice architec-
ture for 401(k) enrollment, complete with a default contribution rate and 
asset allocation. Like automatic enrollment, Quick Enrollment TM has been 
shown to signifi cantly increase 401(k) participation rates. 16 
 Programs of this type appear to be both in the best interests of the 
companies offering them (as evidenced by their revealed preference for 
undertaking the expense and effort to implement them) and benefi cial in 
the long term to consumers. Though we technically can’t be entirely cer-
tain, it’s fairly diffi cult to envision a common scenario where the default 
nudge leads to enrollment when it’s actually optimal for a consumer to not 
enroll in a 401(k) program (mainly because it’s pretty rare that people save 
“too much” for retirement!). 
 “Save More Tomorrow” Programs 
 Behavioral economists have also thought about how to help people 
overcome their time inconsistency and biases toward immediate grati-
fi cation that lead to procrastination in saving decisions. For example, 
Shlomo Benartzi and Richard Thaler lay out a plan entitled “Save More 
Tomorrow” in which participants are encouraged not to put more money 
away today but instead to commit a portion of future pay increases to 
savings. 17 These plans, when implemented in pilot organizations, were 
accepted by almost 80 % of participants, and, of those participants, 80 % 
remained in the program after four pay-raise cycles. Behavioral economics 
can help explain why this is the case:
•  Time inconsistency and biases toward immediate gratifi cation 18 : 
Traditional economic models of intertemporal choice imply that 
individuals’ preferences regarding a future decision will not change 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 131
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

as the time to make the choice draws nearer—that is, individuals are 
“time consistent.” Behavioral economists, on the other hand, incor-
porate the potential for time inconsistency into their choice mod-
els to explain why our preferences often change as potential costs 
and benefi ts become more immediately realized. (Hopefully we can 
all acknowledge that procrastination and biases toward immediate 
gratifi cation have a plethora of empirical documentation in various 
forms.) By not asking for an immediate contribution, the program 
sidesteps consumers’ bias toward immediate gratifi cation and takes 
away a strong incentive to not join. Once enrolled, enrollment 
becomes the status quo and, as a result, status-quo bias serves to 
mitigate the time inconsistency that might otherwise cause individu-
als to unenroll when the time to start saving more rolls around. 
•  Loss aversion 19 : As mentioned earlier, people tend to be “loss averse” 
and overweight potential losses in the decision-making process. As 
a result, the framing of an outcome as a foregone gain rather than 
an explicit loss can make the outcome seem more favorable (or less 
unfavorable) to the individual. By only asking that portions of future 
raises rather than current compensation get committed to savings, 
the program designers turn what would in the moment feel like a 
loss into a foregone future gain and again lessen the incentive to not 
participate. 
 One of the interesting aspects of this program is that consumers could 
choose to implement this strategy themselves via strategically timed 
changes in contribution to a traditional retirement plan, so the increase in 
participation is likely either due to the power of suggestion or the fact that 
consumers hadn’t thought of this strategy until it was presented to them. 20 
Again, given that most consumers report wanting to save more than their 
short-term selves will allow, this nudge is most likely a Pareto nudge. 
 Usage Nudges 
 Many companies utilize business models that, rather than charge a fee for 
each use of a product, collect a time-based subscription fee. Therefore, 
companies whose products are not free to provide fi nd themselves with 
an incentive to nudge customers toward lower usage of their products 
since such usage adds to cost but not revenue. Similarly, some companies 
have an incentive to nudge customers toward lower usage when the price 
charged to the consumer doesn’t cover the marginal cost to the producer 
132 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

at high levels of usage. Intuition suggests that this sort of nudge is not 
good for consumers, but is this always the case? 
 Online Streaming Nudges 
 Many people feel that they watch too much TV and that a “better” version 
of themselves would spend their time differently. Traditional cable televi-
sion providers don’t have an incentive to help these people be their better 
selves—cable programming is going to your television whether or not you 
are watching it, 21 and the providers want you to watch enough that you 
feel justifi ed in continuing to subscribe to the service. 
 Some people who appear to want to cut back on their television con-
sumption state that relying solely on streaming content is one way to help 
achieve this goal. So where do the incentives of streaming services lie? Are 
they going to nudge consumers in a productive way or are they, like the cable 
companies, going to encourage overconsumption? On one hand, stream-
ing providers sometimes have to pay a licensing fee each time that a piece 
of content is viewed, which gives an incentive to nudge toward decreased 
consumption. 22 (In other words, marginal cost is not always effectively 
zero, even when bandwidth is cheap.) On the other hand, more content 
viewed means more opportunity to show revenue-generating advertise-
ments, which gives an incentive to nudge toward increased consumption. 
In addition, increased viewing often gets pepole talking about shows, which 
drives subscriptions. This creates an ambiguous trade-off for services such 
as Hulu, which places ads in its programming content. Other services, such 
as Netfl ix and Amazon, don’t place ads in their content and, as a result, 
have less of an incentive to encourage viewing above and beyond what is 
required to keep a consumer subscribing and what is helpful for word-of-
mouth marketing. So what nudges do the streaming services provide? 
 The main way that streaming services nudge consumers is that they 
periodically require some action from the consumer in order to confi rm 
that the consumer is still watching or listening. This is clearly in the com-
pany’s best interests from a licensing fee perspective, and it might even be 
mandated from the advertisers’ perspective (since they don’t want to pay 
for things that the consumer isn’t paying attention to). This is likely also in 
the interest of those consumers looking to cut back on their consumption, 
since they are essentially asked “Do you REALLY want to keep watching 
the shiny box?” and required to actively respond in the affi rmative rather 
than just go with the default of the next episode or next series coming 
on. (Interestingly, Hulu’s interface is more “user friendly” in terms of 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 133
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

automatically playing the next episode or show once the current one is 
fi nished, which is entirely consistent with the incentives that the advertis-
ing model creates.) Again, this nudge is thought to be effective based on 
two behavioral principles:
•  Status-quo bias 23 : As mentioned earlier, loss aversion causes indi-
viduals to be biased toward choices that are closer to an individual’s 
current state, that is, the status quo. Because the status quo is similar 
to a default in that it is often the outcome that will persist if the 
consumer does nothing, consumers are biased toward the default 
option of continuing to watch if no “do you want to keep watch-
ing” question is asked. By introducing such a question and requiring 
the consumer to take explicit action in order to keep watching, the 
service is debiasing customers and perhaps even biasing them toward 
watching less, since that is technically the outcome that will occur if 
the consumer does nothing. 
•  Salience and decision-making 24 : Economic research suggests that 
consumers overweight more salient attributes of a product in their 
decision-making processes. By asking consumers if they want to 
continue watching, streaming services are making it salient that the 
consumer has already been watching for a while, thus encouraging 
them to overweight “time already spent” in the choice process and 
discouraging further consumption. 
 Note that the above considerations imply that even seemingly similar 
questions of “are you still watching?” and “do you want to keep watch-
ing?” may not have the same effect on consumers. In addition, consum-
ers who feel that they are watching the right amount of content may get 
annoyed with the nudge, especially if they don’t have a remote control 
nearby. Overall, however, this nudge is probably in line with what con-
sumers would want in the long run—one only need to go online and com-
pare the number of articles about how to watch less TV (or why people 
should watch less TV) to the number of articles about how to watch more 
TV to substantiate this generalization! 
 Utility Provider Nudges 
 If you are in charge of your household’s utility bills, you have likely noticed 
a recent phenomenon where your utility bill now includes information 
on your energy usage as compared to that of your neighbors and then 
134 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 suggests some ways to conserve energy. Since conserving energy really 
means buying less of the product that the company is trying to sell you, 
these nudges may seem a little perplexing. Is it really the case that your 
utilities have the proper incentives to encourage energy conservation? 
 In many cases, the answer is yes, for two reasons. First, the government 
agencies that regulate the utilities often give either mandates or incentives 
to the companies in order to get them to encourage conservation. 25 Second, 
because the utilities are charged with serving what often seems to be an 
ever-expanding universe of energy demand, it is sometimes more cost effec-
tive intended encourage customers to use less energy than it is to either buy 
energy externally on wholesale markets in order to meet demand or incur the 
fi xed costs of expanding one’s own facilities. These two observations imply 
that it’s pretty safe to conclude that the nudges put out by the utilities are 
intended to encourage less rather than more energy usage. What is less clear 
is whether consumers’ long-term selves really care all that much about using 
less energy or whether the negative externalities generated by energy usage 
give society a reason to care even when individuals don’t. (Economically 
speaking, both of these reasons give valid justifi cation for putting a nudge 
in place, but it’s important to recognize that the reasons are not one and 
the same and may affect the effectiveness of the nudge.) In either case, the 
nudge works because of a powerful principle of infl uence research:
•  Descriptive social norms: People tend to want to behave in accor-
dance with the behaviors of people like them. That said, “like them” 
has a number of different interpretations, but one interpretation that 
motivates behavior is “in a similar situation,” and such a comparison 
is known as a descriptive social norm. In a seminal fi eld experiment, 
for example, researchers increased hotel towel reuse by informing 
guests that most of the people who stayed in the same room decided 
to reuse their towels. 26 In the energy context, showing the energy 
usage of neighbors likely has the same effect in that it sends a  message 
to large consumers of energy that “your neighbors are conserving, 
shouldn’t you be conserving too?” 
 Field experiments specifi c to the energy industry have confi rmed the 
effectiveness of social norm nudges in reducing consumption. For exam-
ple, one study shows that receiving information about electricity usage 
in comparison to that of others in the neighborhood decreases usage by 
between 1 and 2 kWh per day for those households that were higher than 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 135
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

average users. 27 Unfortunately, the study also suggests that the nudge 
slightly increases usage for those households that consume less than aver-
age, which somewhat mutes the overall effectiveness of the nudge unless 
the nudge is selectively applied. (This latter effect can be mitigated, how-
ever, with the inclusion of an injunctive message of approval or disap-
proval.) Similar energy reduction of 1–2 % as a result of peer comparison 
messages is found in studies conducted by energy providers themselves. 28 
 Previous attempts at encouraging conservation have included the use 
of subsidies for energy-effi cient light bulbs and other household products, 
but the nudge-based approaches appear to generate an effect at least as 
large at lower cost to the company (and, as a result in some cases, lower 
cost to the taxpayer). Does the nudge make consumers better off? After 
all, the descriptive norm by itself can cause some households to increase 
their energy consumption, and not everyone necessarily has energy con-
servation as a long-term goal. (In fact, the effects of such a nudge are 
much stronger for liberals than for conservatives, and conservatives dis-
proportionately report not liking the messages and choose to opt out of 
such mailings. 29 ) Narrowly speaking, it’s unclear whether this nudge as 
typically enacted makes consumers better off, but it is possible to provide 
a more targeted nudge that will reach a largely receptive audience and 
mitigate perverse effects. From a broader societal perspective, the nudge 
is effi cient because it reduces energy costs on average (eliminating some 
production that is sold at an ineffi ciently low price, particularly during 
peak usage) and reduces the externalities generated by energy consump-
tion, which benefi ts consumers overall as a group. 
 Compliance Nudges 
 It’s not diffi cult to acknowledge that, as long as the price charged for a 
product covers the producer’s marginal cost of production, selling more 
of a product is benefi cial to producers. Producers’ nudging incentives are 
aligned with the incentives of consumers when the product is something 
that consumers’ long-term selves wish that they would consume more of. 
With what types of products does this occur? 
 There are a number of markets that have such incentives—a quick 
thought exercise brings to mind pharmaceuticals, health food, and even 
auto maintenance. For example, drug treatment compliance is a big issue 
in the medical fi eld, and it would be in patients’ best interests to have a sys-
tem that encourages proper and complete usage of the prescriptions that 
they are given. Similarly, it is in the interest of pharmaceutical companies 
136 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

for consumers to fi nish their prescriptions since it results in more product 
being purchased. (Insurance companies may also benefi t if compliance in 
the short term decreases medical costs in the long run.) Therefore, under-
standing in what ways consumers can be nudged toward better drug com-
pliance using behavioral principles is of paramount importance:
•  Descriptive social norms 30 : It is likely the case that the same descrip-
tive norm messages that have been shown to help consumers reduce 
their energy usage can get them to take their pills as well. 
•  Overweighting of small probabilities 31 : The notion of prospect theory, 
developed by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky as an empirically 
supported alternative to expected utility theory, states that consum-
ers tend to subjectively overweight small probabilities in the deci-
sion-making process (as long as the probabilities aren’t so small that 
consumers round them to zero). This observation can help explain, 
for example, why people participate in state-sponsored lotteries, even 
though the odds are clearly not in their favor. It’s not surprising, 
therefore, that similar logic suggests that small lottery incentives for 
drug compliance could be leveraged in a nudge-like manner. 
 In one study, stroke patients who were prescribed the drug warfarin 
were entered into a lottery that offered a 1 % chance of winning $100, 
with the payout being contingent on proper adherence to the drug regi-
men. The study was based on a small sample size, but it did show a com-
pliance rate of 100 % as compared to 80 % in the control group that was 
not given the lottery. 32 While more of a fi nancial incentive than a nudge 
in the strictest sense, this result is consistent with the nudge ideals of not 
forcing the consumer to do anything and to offer a small change that has 
a disproportionately large effect. 
 Similar opportunities may exist in other contexts to encourage com-
pliance with agreed-upon rules and practices. For example, credit-card 
companies have largely shifted to offering auto-pay options for customers, 
and one has even implemented a rewards system that credits customers 
both when they make purchases and when they make payments. Such sys-
tems are clearly good for consumers as long as it is reasonable to believe 
that their long-run selves would want to pay down their debt rather than 
amassing fees, but they will most likely only be provided by companies 
that fi nd encouraging timely payment to be more profi table than charging 
fees and risking future consumer default and collection costs. 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 137
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 It’s interesting to note that the nudges studied here are profi table for the 
fi rms implementing them because they increase the profi t that the fi rms earn 
from each consumer. It’s important to keep in mind, however, that this is not 
necessary in order for a nudge to be profi table for a fi rm. Counterintuitively, 
it is possible for a nudge that is unprofi table on a per-customer basis to be 
profi table overall if it increases the number of consumers doing business 
with the nudge-providing producer. (Like some other cases that we analyze, 
this outcome requires consumers to be self-aware about their need for a 
nudge.) In addition, a nudge that is not directly profi table could stilll be 
benefi cial to a fi rm if it improves brand image or loyalty in a general sense. 
 Rent-Seeking Nudges 
 It’s probably not shocking that most academic research focuses on 
nudges that are at least perceived as being in consumers’ best interests. 
Unfortunately, this doesn’t mean that most of the nudges implemented by 
private fi rms actually benefi t consumers—one need only think back to the 
infomercial and free shipping nudges described earlier to see that various 
forms of marketing fi t pretty squarely into the category of rent- seeking 
nudges. Therefore, it’s important to examine where else rent-seeking 
nudges tend to occur and how to spot them, especially since they often 
rely on the same tactics used to generate Pareto nudges in other contexts. 
 Choice Architecture Nudges 
 Just as the presence of a default can have strong effects on 401(k) participa-
tion, defaults can be chosen by marketers to increase adoption and sales of 
items that consumers’ long-term selves may not necessarily want. This sort 
of choice architecture or “default” nudge has become so ubiquitous that 
we almost don’t notice it any more—how many times do we encounter 
a default opt-in to an email newsletter, for example? Such default nudges 
also arise when a consumer installs Java and is presented with a default of 
installing a particular browser toolbar or antivirus software, or when the 
consumer has to actively opt out if she doesn’t want the supplementary 
insurance on a car rental. Such nudges are particularly effective because 
they exploit not only status-quo bias as discussed earlier but also lack of 
salience, since the consumer may not even realize that she had a choice 
to make in the fi rst place. (Note that salience in this context refers not 
only to the features of a consumer’s options but also to the opportunity 
to make an active choice in the fi rst place.) Given that car rental insurance 
138 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

is both generally vastly overpriced and often redundant, a choice archi-
tecture nudge that results in consumption is pretty clearly a rent-seeking 
nudge. As for the email and toolbar defaults, one need only consider how 
many people set up a separate junk email account for such items and how 
many people have signed a  change.org petition requesting that Oracle 
stop bundling the Ask toolbar with the Java Installer by default 33 to infer 
that such nudges are of the rent-seeking variety. 
 Usage Nudges 
 As noted earlier, there is a general incentive for fi rms that charge subscrip-
tion fees to discourage actual use of their products. This is obviously bad 
for consumers when consumers get positive marginal utility from using 
the products and especially when consumers know that their long-term 
selves would want them to use the products more. This misalignment of 
incentives can give rise to rent-seeking nudges, whose effects are often 
compounded by nudges that discourage consumers from cancelling the 
service that they are underutilizing. In other words, for anyone who has 
ever tried and failed to “quit the gym,” 34 the next section is for you. 
 Gym Memberships 
 Many individuals report that their long-term selves would like their short- 
term selves to go to the gym more than they actually do. In contrast, many 
gyms operate via business models that depend on most people not actu-
ally going to the gym. 35 (This is particularly true for gyms with very low 
monthly fees.) Therefore, these gyms have incentives to nudge customers 
toward continuing to pay the monthly fees and away from actually using 
the facilities, which is somewhat of a delicate balance. Gyms achieve this 
balance using a number of behavioral economics principles:
•  The Sunk-Cost Fallacy 36 : Research in behavioral economics shows 
that people are more likely to use a good or service if they pay a 
higher amount for it. (This stands in contrast to rational behavior 
because the amount paid is a nonrecoverable sunk cost and therefore 
shouldn’t factor into the forward-looking decision-making process.) 
Therefore, some gyms will charge a low monthly fee that brings in 
revenue but doesn’t make the consumer feel like she has to “get her 
money’s worth.” 
•  Lack of payment salience: Because payments are generally made via 
a debit or credit card, the customer doesn’t go through the act of 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 139
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

writing a check or otherwise actively handing over the payment each 
month. This lack of salience makes customers less likely to reevalu-
ate their membership decisions and more likely to stay enrolled. In 
fact, customers on month-to-month contracts are more likely than 
those on yearly commitment contracts to maintain their membership 
past the one-year mark, likely because they aren’t faced with a salient 
renewal decision. 37 
•  Hurdles to contract termination: The success of nudges rests on the 
observation that seemingly small hurdles or transaction costs can 
have irrationally large effects on behavior. By requiring that con-
tracts be terminated in person or via registered mail, gyms create 
exactly these theoretically small hurdles that prevent people from 
cancelling. Whereas a long-run-oriented consumer realizes that the 
small action saves her from what is potentially a lifetime of future 
gym payments, the short-run-oriented consumer views the hassle of 
cancelling against the immediate small monthly payment and decides 
that the effort isn’t worth it … only to fi nd that the effort is again 
not worth it the next month! 38 
•  Noncore utilization: Some gyms, both by setting low monthly 
fees and by showcasing nongym amenities (couches, juice bars, 
etc.), actively select for consumers who are predisposed to not 
use the gym. Furthermore, these gyms actually nudge custom-
ers away from using the actual gym part of the gym by hosting 
seemingly absurd pizza parties and movie nights. The logic is 
that these amenities will get people to keep paying their mem-
bership even when they realize that they are not going to actu-
ally use the gym, but there is an additional nudge in that these 
activities make people feel like they’ve used the gym (i.e. gotten 
their money’s worth) and therefore decreases the desire for them 
to actually come back and use the gym part in order to “recoup” 
their sunk cost. 
 This scenario highlights the danger in trusting markets to provide pro-
ductive nudges to consumers, since it’s very clear that these nudges are 
not things that most consumers’ long-term selves would approve of. Such 
policies are typically associated with the gym industry, but they can arise in 
a number of different contexts—just think of how many companies make 
it very easy to sign up for a service online and how few make it easy to 
cancel service in a similar manner. 
140 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Rental Subscription Nudges 
 In 1997, Netfl ix debuted a novel business model when it offered custom-
ers the opportunity to pay a monthly fee for unlimited DVD rentals by 
mail, subject to the constraint that customers could only keep three DVDs 
out at a time. Under this system, customers do not pay an explicit late fee 
regardless of how long a DVD is kept, which was in stark contrast to the 
policies of traditional video rental stores at the time. (There is, of course, 
an implicit late fee in that if a consumer holds a DVD for a long time it 
reduces the capacity to receive other DVDs.) More recently, companies 
have introduced this model to other industries—nowadays, you can even 
pay $139 per month for unlimited fashion rentals! 39 
 Under this business model, companies have no direct way to increase 
revenue per customer, which leaves cost reduction as the most likely path 
to increased profi ts. Since the marginal cost of shipping out another DVD, 
outfi t, or other item is not zero, companies that use rental subscription 
business models have a fi nancial incentive to nudge consumers to keep 
items longer and exchange them less frequently. Interestingly enough, 
such companies also benefi t from open-ended rental periods and longer 
(and more uncertain) holding periods because such behavior means that 
they don’t have to stock as many items categorized as “new releases” in 
order to meet customer demand. 40 
 Do rental-subscription companies nudge in this manner, and, if so, how? 
First and foremost, it’s highly unlikely that such companies are going to 
increase the salience of the fact that you’ve had an item checked out for far 
longer than is probably rationally reasonable by emailing or otherwise con-
tacting customers regarding such matters (or at all unless necessary), and 
this lack of action can be viewed as a passive nudge. Theoretically, a com-
pany could even nudge strategically in this way by only  reminding custom-
ers regarding their rentals when they hold an item that is in high demand 
overall, but this behavior does not appear to be prevalent. Furthermore, 
rental subscription companies have an incentive to nudge consumers away 
from all wanting new products at the same time, and there is evidence that 
such companies passively implement such nudges. For example, Netfl ix 
made the decision a number of years ago to remove the “Releasing This 
Week” section of its site for its physical DVD rentals but kept other similar 
recommendation sections for older titles. 
 Overall, such nudges increase the effective price per item that consum-
ers pay and reduce the value that they get from their purchases. While 
it is possible that consumers feel that they consume more movies than 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 141
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

their long-term selves would want in the same way that they feel about 
streaming video, the lack of immediate gratifi cation inherent in the mailing 
process makes it less likely that their behavior differs from rational utility 
maximization to the degree that it does with streaming video. As a result, 
such nudges that are good for the rental subscription services are not good 
for consumers—that is, they count as rent-seeking nudges. Luckily for con-
sumers, Netfl ix hasn’t yet decided to nudge consumers toward ordering 
documentaries rather than action thrillers, even though there is evidence 
that such a policy would help its bottom line via longer holding periods! 41 
 Honesty Nudges 
 There are many cases in the marketplace where the price of a service to the 
consumer (and, in most cases, the cost of providing the service) depends 
on the particular characteristics of each consumer. In some of these cases, 
logistics dictate that the most effi cient way of documenting these char-
acteristics is to have the consumer report them herself. For example, this 
approach is prevalent in a number of insurance markets, where potential 
customers are asked for information about their health, personal prop-
erty, and so on without having this information verifi ed by a third party. 
Getting customers to report data that results in higher prices is in the best 
interests of the producer (as long as the customer doesn’t decide not to 
purchase), so how can they nudge consumers in a profi table direction? 
 One study suggests that the answer might be as simple as having cus-
tomers sign the form (thus affi rming that all information is accurate) at the 
beginning rather than at the end. In a sample of about 13,000 auto insur-
ance customers who were asked to report their mileage driven, a “sign 
at beginning” policy resulted in almost 11 % more miles being reported 
than an otherwise equivalent “sign at end” form. 42 (In contrast, the “sign 
at end” approach doesn’t result in behavior that is signifi cantly different 
from not asking for a signature at all.) Granted, the categorization of this 
nudge as rent-seeking requires a bit of philosophical pondering—while 
it is true that many consumers’ long-term selves would place a priority 
on being honest, it is nonetheless true that such nudges make consumers 
fi nancially worse off in a way that is profi table for producers, thus fi tting 
the defi nition (though perhaps not the spirit) of a rent-seeking nudge. 
 The above examples illustrate the “dark” side of private-sector nudging 
in that they show that what is best for fi rms’ profi ts isn’t always in line with 
what is in consumers’ long-term best interests. As an educated onlooker, 
142 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

it’s easy to spot rent-seeking nudges where the incentives of fi rms and 
consumers are not aligned, but there is no guarantee that consumers 
themselves will be aware that they are being nudged away from their long- 
term best interests. Furthermore, it is entirely possible that consumers are 
still susceptible to rent-seeking nudges (technically, to any nudge) even if 
they are aware that they are in fact being nudged. 
 Nudges and Market Heterogeneity 
 The nudges described so far have been fairly simple to analyze in that they 
were judged as (at least approximately) universally good for consumers 
or universally bad for consumers, and likewise for producers. If we were 
to take the defi nition of “universally” very literally, of course, we would 
realize that no nudge can be counted on to be either universally good or 
bad—for example, there’s always going to be those idiosyncratic people 
who would want to be nudged to save less, go to the gym less frequently, 
or watch more streaming video. Overall, this sort of heterogeneity isn’t 
worrisome for two reasons. First, given that a nudge can be argued to 
benefi t society overall if it helps more people than it hinders, a small idio-
syncratic minority isn’t enough to negate the overall wisdom of the nudge. 
Second, it is often not possible to create a truly neutral choice architecture, 
which implies that a nudge of some sort is in place whether it is explicitly 
designed or not. It is somewhat nonsensical to see this somewhat random 
nudge as more valid simply because it’s already there, especially since such 
a nudge also likely benefi ts some people and hinders others. 
 That said, one can easily identify cases where the effect of a nudge on 
consumers is truly ambiguous due to heterogeneity in preferences and 
behavior. It’s important to recognize when these situations occur, since 
this heterogeneity makes it diffi cult to classify a nudge as either Pareto 
or rent-seeking. In addition, it is possible to identify cases where further 
investigation is needed in order to determine whether a nudge is even 
profi table for a producer in the fi rst place. 
 Savings Nudges 
 In the aggregate, it appears that automatic enrollment programs for 
401(k) participation make employees better off (i.e. are Pareto nudges) 
because overall employee participation increases, and, as stated earlier, 
most people are well served by saving more. It should be noted, however, 
that the evidence also suggests that some employees are harmed by the 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 143
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

program in that they would have chosen to save more if prompted with 
the need to opt in and actively choose a contribution amount, whereas 
the default allows them to just go with the fl ow and, as a result, go with a 
lower rate of saving. 43 An ideal program would try to correct for this and 
actively encourage people to engage on the contribution amount decision 
even if they are not engaging on the enrollment decision itself. 
 Nutrition Nudges 
 By now, just about everyone interested in the power of nudges has 
heard about former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg’s ill-fated 
attempt to nudge by banning all sugary drinks over a certain size. 44 (He 
argued that this counts as a nudge rather than an outright ban because 
people still had the option to purchase multiple smaller beverages.) This 
is obviously a government-sponsored nudge, but, as a related matter, 
do private companies in the food industry have the proper incentives 
to nudge consumers toward their long-term well-being, and, just as 
importantly, is there a universal direction in which it’s “good” to nudge 
consumers? 
 The answer is unfortunately (at least from a public policy perspective) 
less clear than one would hope. On the pessimistic side, it is unlikely that 
a company selling mainly unhealthy products would voluntarily nudge 
consumers toward better long-term choices. On a brighter note, stores 
that sell both healthy and unhealthy products would likely be more than 
happy to nudge customers toward healthier alternatives—provided, of 
course, that the healthy alternatives are higher-margin products than 
the unhealthy ones! Stores that sell mainly healthy products seem like 
they might have an incentive to nudge consumers by providing calorie 
counts on menus and other informational nudges, but this isn’t necessar-
ily the case. Because many consumers know very little about the nutrition 
 information in what they consume, it could be the case that even the 
nutrition information of healthy items looks intimidating or somehow 
bad compared to the blissful ignorance of the nonlabeled food at the less 
healthy store. If this is the prevailing mindset, then even the stores selling 
healthy items have an incentive to keep their nutrition information less 
visible. (This helps to explain why some restaurants welcome nutrition 
information mandates even when they wouldn’t print the nutrition infor-
mation on their menus voluntarily.) 
 One area where Pareto nudges may be available, however, is in the 
realm of voluntary downsizing. With such a nudge, rather than being 
144 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

asked “would you like to supersize that?”, consumers would be asked if 
they would like to downsize their portion of an unhealthy item. In one 
study, up to one-third of consumers accepted the downsizing offer, even 
when no nontrivial price decrease was present. 45 If consumers accept a 
smaller portion without requiring a signifi cant price decrease, such a nudge 
should be profi table for producers. In addition, since very few people cite 
“not eating enough unhealthy food” as keeping them from being their 
long-term best selves, this nudge also appears to generally be in the best 
interests of consumers. That said, such an approach must be applied care-
fully in order to be benefi cial—since it appears that consumers are fairly 
susceptible to the power of suggestion in general, one could likely achieve 
a similar result by asking consumers to downsize a portion of a healthy 
item (and likely make up for it with a less healthy item later), which would 
be classifi ed as a rent-seeking nudge. 
 The previous example notwithstanding, nutrition-based nudges are 
somewhat of a mixed bag overall. Whether nudges that promote healthy 
choices will be provided by private fi rms depends both on whether healthy 
foods are more profi table than unhealthy ones and whether healthy foods 
can be marketed as effectively as unhealthy foods. Whether such nudges 
will be helpful for consumers depends on their ability to properly inter-
pret the information that such nudges convey and whether their goals are 
in line with the promoted defi nition of “healthy” in the fi rst place. For 
example, calorie counts essentially tell consumers where to get the most 
energy per dollar spent, so it’s not obvious that providing such informa-
tion would result in lower-calorie choices or even choices that are benefi -
cial in a long-term sense. In addition, calorie counts taken out of context 
could nudge people away from more nutrient-rich choices and trigger a 
form of availability bias 46 in decision-making. 
 Further complicating the implementation of benefi cial nutrition 
nudges is the fact that companies may not even always realize when they 
are nudging their customers. For example, retailers have found that dedi-
cated produce sections of shopping carts as well as the presence of mir-
rors encourage healthy choices, 47 but they might not be aware of the fact 
that consumers seem to choose more unhealthy items as a reward for the 
perceived effort of lugging a basket around the store. 48 In this sort of envi-
ronment, whether nudges are good or bad for consumers likely depends 
on a number of factors both relating to the individual and to her particular 
purchasing experience, making such nudges diffi cult to implement and 
evaluate individually. 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 145
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Salience Nudges 
 Many companies claim to help consumers by simplifying the buying pro-
cess and thus making consumers’ lives easier. Overall, can we tell whether 
such policies make consumers better off in the long run? Let’s examine. 
 Auto-renewal Nudges 
 Anyone who has purchased typical household items on  Amazon.com 
recently has likely noticed that the company now offers a discount for cus-
tomers who are willing to sign up for a subscription to the item, in which 
case a recurring quantity of the item will be shipped automatically until the 
subscription is actively cancelled. This is obviously a nudge toward pur-
chasing more of the item, and it is likely quite powerful in that it switches 
the default from not receiving the item to receiving the item. 
 Many services have had this model for a long time, and it’s clearly in the 
best interest of those trying to increase sales. What is less clear is whether 
this nudge is good or bad for consumers. Some consumers—for example, 
those who rush around frantically looking for that last roll of toilet paper 
that they hid in case of emergency—are likely better off with this kind of 
nudge. Those customers who can plan for themselves and would use the 
fl exibility wisely are probably worse off, especially in the condition where 
they fi nd their stockpile of paper products growing without bound. 
 Automatic Payment Nudges 
 In the movie  Manhattan , Woody Allen comments that his lady love looks 
so beautiful that he can barely keep his eyes on the taxi meter. The line is 
obviously included for comedic effect, but it also illustrates the behavioral 
principle that people don’t like their costs to be numerous and salient. By 
this logic, consumers could be nudged to consume more by taking away 
the meter and making payment more automatic. 
 Lots of companies already do this by simply accepting credit cards. 
Credit cards, aside from relaxing consumers’ liquidity constraints, nudge 
them toward more consumption by taking away the pain of paying—a 
single swipe of a card (especially because it doesn’t feel like money) is less 
painful than the aggregation of handing over each individual bill, and, 
by extension, paying one credit card bill is less painful to many than the 
aggregation of each individual transaction. (In fact, economists Drazen 
Prelec and Duncan Simester fi nd that consumers’ willingness to pay can 
be increased signifi cantly by instructing them to use credit cards rather 
than cash. 49 ) Some companies, such as Uber, take this principle one step 
further by keeping your payment information on fi le and not even making 
146 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

consumers swipe a card at the time of purchase. This behavior nudges 
consumers further toward increased consumption, but is this in the best 
interests of consumers? 
 The answer is far from clear. If people objectively weigh costs and 
benefi ts when they are forced to look at the cash or the meter, then 
taking away these features of the decision will cause consumers to con-
sume more than is in line with their long-term interests. On the other 
hand, if people are being irrationally stingy when they see the cash being 
handed over or the meter running, then the nudges that are in line with 
the companies’ incentives could in fact be a good thing for consumers 
as well. Overall, it is diffi cult to judge the productivity of this nudge 
without fi rst determining how many of each type of consumer exist in 
a market. 
 As the heterogeneity of the effect of a nudge increases, the social jus-
tifi cation for implementing such a nudge decreases. This doesn’t mean, 
however, that attempts to nudge in such ways should be immediately 
abandoned. Instead, companies could try to identify consumer groups 
that would benefi t from the nudge (or would at least make the nudge 
profi table) and target accordingly, or they could rely on self-selection by 
having customers voluntarily subject themselves to the nudge (as we’ve 
already seen is done in a number of cases). 
 The preceding examples show that it is certainly possible, but in no way 
guaranteed, that marketers have incentives to nudge consumers toward 
rather than away from their long-term best interests. This suggests, at 
the very least, that not all Pareto nudges have to come from the govern-
ment. That said, until the social pressure for corporate social responsibil-
ity becomes much greater than it is today, private companies can only be 
relied upon to provide nudges that are either in line with their profi tability 
or are directly or indirectly mandated by the government (such as the 
401(k)  enrollment and the energy use incentives). This implies that mar-
kets will fail to provide Pareto nudges when at least one of the following 
conditions is met:
•  The private incentives of the fi rms encourage marketers to nudge 
consumers away from rather than toward their long-term best 
interests. 
•  Consumers are heterogeneous in their preferences and behaviors to 
a degree that it’s not obvious what a “good” versus “bad” nudge is. 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 147
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 In these situations, either private nudging fi rms or the government 
could step in to provide the appropriate nudges, though care must be 
taken in order to avoid the same diffi culties often encountered by private 
producers when designing nudges. 
 OPPORTUNITIES FOR OTHER MARKET NUDGES 
 We’ve just seen that, while it’s not impossible for companies to have 
incentives to provide Pareto nudges, these incentives don’t exist in all 
organizations. One natural implication of this observation is that the gov-
ernment has an opportunity to step in and provide consumer-welfare-
enhancing nudges itself. What is less often considered, but is potentially 
a powerful possibility, is that markets provide the incentives for entrepre-
neurs to create benefi cial nudges even when companies trying to sell their 
wares to consumers don’t have the incentives to provide such nudges 
themselves. 
 For example, after studying behavioral economics and consumer irratio-
nality for a number of years, I have an entrepreneurial dream of opening a 
mall kiosk, preferably directly outside of a Best Buy, that sells advice to not, 
except perhaps in very extenuating circumstances, purchase any point-of-
sale extended warranties that are offered. Unfortunately, I have yet to envi-
sion a satisfactory business model for such an endeavor that would both be 
acceptable to the consumer and compensate me for my time and ingenuity. 
The problem appears to lie in the fact that, if consumers knew that such 
advice was valuable and thus worth paying for, they likely would also know 
not to purchase the extended warranty without me having to advise them 
as such. (I hereby declare this the economics version of the Dunning – 
Kruger effect.) That said, let’s examine some other business models that 
appear to make consumer-welfare-enhancing nudges profi table. 
 In 2007, Yale economics professor Dean Karlan, along with cofound-
ers Ian Ayres and Jordan Goldberg, decided to create what he viewed as 
an online “commitment store.” In this store, consumers can defi ne a goal 
that they want to be nudged toward (weight loss, fi nishing a draft of that 
novel, etc.) and assign a monitor to confi rm whether or not the goal has 
been achived. The consumer also assigns an amount of money to the goal, 
which, if the goal is not met, will be charged to the consumer’s credit card 
and either given to a third-party individual or an “anti-charity”—that is, 
a charity for a cause that the consumer does not believe in. Karlan named 
this company  stickk.com , to represent either “sticking” to one’s goal or 
148 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

being prodded with the stick part of a carrot-and-stick incentive. (The 
additional k is an homage to the fact that K is legal jargon for a contract.) 50 
 Stickk.com essentially acts as a soft commitment device for consumers—
“soft” because, unlike Ulysses tying himself to his ship’s mast to make him 
unable to succumb to the Sirens, consumers at  stickk.com are still free to 
fail to achieve their goals, they just face an artifi cially constructed mon-
etary penalty for doing so. Therefore,  stickk.com ’s product fi ts within the 
defi nition of nudges or libertarian paternalism since it is focused on chang-
ing incentives rather than specifi cally constraining behavior. The company, 
registered as a for-profi t LLC, earns its revenue via advertising and cus-
tomized and cobranded enterprise solutions. 
 Once we start looking, it’s not that hard to fi nd commercial prod-
ucts that either purposefully or inadvertently serve a nudging function. 
A FitBit, for example, is a simple device that tracks how much physical 
activity an individual experiences throughout the day. A side effect of the 
device, however, is that it serves as a physical reminder to be active (since 
it’s usually worn on the wrist) and a source of positive and negative rein-
forcement when the activity statistics are viewed. 
 These examples show that, in some cases at least, the free market pro-
vides suffi cient incentives to bring helpful nudges to some groups of 
consumers. In addition, it is entirely possible that not-for-profi t organiza-
tions could step in to provide societally benefi cial nudges when a specifi c 
business model can’t be developed, though such developments are often 
driven by ideology on a one-off basis and thus can’t be guaranteed to 
occur. Endeavors such as  stickk.com shouldn’t be viewed as a panacea 
for all self-control problems and deviations from long-term well-being, 
however, since people must be self-aware to some degree to realize that 
they could benefi t from using such tools, and such self-awareness is not 
likely to be universally present. In addition, people must be willing to be 
nudged in a good direction, whereas they might not even be aware that 
their status-quo environment is nudging them in a bad direction. The 
good news is that these companies have a profi t motive to raise awareness 
regarding the need for and benefi ts of nudges! 
 One additional area where there appears to be signifi cant opportunity 
is in the market for companies that sell nudge strategies to private fi rms 
and governments. For example, Allianz Global Investors has developed 
a “PlanSuccess” product that purports to use the principles of behav-
ioral economics and fi nance to improve 401k plans, 51 and you may have 
noticed some brand names on the nudge strategies described earlier. Even 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 149
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

UK Prime Minister David Cameron’s Behavioral Insights Team (aka the 
“nudge squad”), founded in 2010, is being spun off as a for-profi t enter-
prise, replacing two-thirds of the government ownership with private 
investment and employee ownership. 52 
 GOVERNMENT’S ROLE IN NUDGING 
 So far, we’ve seen not only that private enterprise has some incentives to 
provide nudges that are benefi cial to consumers (either directly or indi-
rectly) but also that it lacks incentives to provide some benefi cial nudges 
and instead has incentives to provide some rent-seeking nudges. In an 
economic context, an inability of markets to self-organize to provide a 
good or service for which the benefi ts to society outweigh the costs to 
society (or, conversely, to refrain from producing a good for which the 
costs outweigh the benefi ts) is classifi ed as a market failure, which enables 
the government to create rather than destroy market value via regulation 
or direct provision. Similarly, the failure of markets to provide nudges that 
are socially effi cient and the incentives for markets to provide nudges that 
are socially ineffi cient provide justifi cation for the government to imple-
ment its own benefi cial nudges and outlaw rent-seeking nudges. 
 One appealing feature of government nudges is that they rely far less on 
voluntary participation than do many private-sector nudges. In addition, 
nudges coming from the government are often thought of as created solely 
with the direct well-being of citizens in mind. In reality, however, govern-
ments often face similar incentives as those of private businesses when it 
comes to revenue generation and budgeting, so it is entirely possible that a 
similar tension exists between governments and citizens as exists between 
marketers and consumers. In addition, even governments can’t escape the 
existence of consumer heterogeneity and thus don’t always have a logisti-
cal opportunity to improve upon market-provided nudges. 
 As the above caveat suggests, many initial offi cial government nudges 
focused on increasing tax receipts, or, somewhat equivalently, decreasing 
the “pain” associated with paying taxes. As mentioned earlier, UK Prime 
Minister David Cameron created the cabinet offi ce’s Behavioral Insights 
Team, more affectionately (or at least colloquially) known as the “nudge 
squad,” in 2010. The mandate of this group was to fi nd ways to nudge 
people toward their long-term best interests in ways that, as a matter of 
course, also serve to benefi t the government. In order to increase tax com-
pliance, personalized letters were sent to those who owed taxes on their 
150 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

cars (including pictures of said delinquent cars); this nudge tripled the 
response rate to tax demands. Informing citizens that most of their neigh-
bors had already paid their taxes caused tax payment rates to increase by 15 
percentage points. Sending texts to those who owe court fi nes increased 
compliance by 28 percentage points. 53 
 In addition, many states have seen the introduction of electronic tran-
sponders (EZPass in New York, for example) that are designed to simplify 
the process of paying highway tolls. Such devices are clearly a convenience 
for drivers, and it’s easy to imagine how they also save governments 
money in the long run since they replace an ongoing cost of having to 
staff people at toll booths with a (mainly) fi xed cost of automated system 
implementation. Behavioral economists see an additional reason why such 
systems may be appealing to governments. Because the salience of paying 
a toll is decreased when a repeated cash outlay is replaced with a monthly 
line item on a credit card statement, the automated systems act as a nudge 
to get people to keep using toll roads when tolls (i.e. tax rates) increase. 
This nudge, in turn, makes it easier for governments to increase tax rev-
enue by increasing tolls. To this end, economist Amy Finkelstein fi nds 
that implementation of such automated systems results in toll rates that 
are 20–40 % higher than what they would have been had the systems not 
been put in place. 54 
 Are such nudges in the best interests of citizens? It depends, since such 
an assessment depends on one’s perspective. In the short run, the policies 
do result in citizens paying more money to the government, resulting in 
rent-seeking nudges. In the longer term, however, it is likely that people 
would want to pay their taxes simply and on time rather than incur fi nes, 
interest, and hassle, and citizens in general benefi t from the lower tax rates 
that prompt and effective tax collection enables. Nonetheless, it’s worth 
noting that the long-term Pareto aspect of the nudges arises somewhat by 
coincidence rather than by design. This is not to say that governments never 
create nudges solely with citizen welfare in mind (in fact, that’s supposed to 
be one of the main ways in which governments and private fi rms differ), but 
it’s important to keep in mind that this sole priority is in no way a guarantee. 
 DISCUSSION 
 The examples in this essay show that both private fi rms (either directly or 
as a third party) and governments have incentives to provide both Pareto 
and rent-seeking nudges, depending on the market situation. For both 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 151
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

types of entities, the incentive to provide nudges that are benefi cial to con-
sumers depends (hopefully to varying degrees) mainly on whether such 
nudges are also benefi cial to the organization. In addition, the ability of 
both types of entities to provide nudges that make consumers better off is 
logistically constrained by whether consumers are similar enough to one 
another that a benefi cial nudge can be identifi ed. Furthermore, private 
fi rms are sometimes limited in their ability to unilaterally impose nudges 
(even Pareto nudges) and often have to rely on consumers being self- 
aware enough to voluntarily submit to a nudge. 
 Much discussion exists regarding the appropriate role for government 
in nudging consumers toward “good” long-run outcomes. To understand 
this topic, it’s helpful to consider the economic role of government more 
generally. From an economist’s standpoint, two effi ciency-increasing roles 
of government are to provide public goods and to internalize market 
externalities. One feature of public goods, as defi ned by economists, is 
that they are not limited to paying customers. 55 With public goods, the 
incentives to not pay and instead free-ride off of the payments of others 
create a coordination failure whereby free markets can’t profi t by provid-
ing public goods even when such goods would be benefi cial to society. 
Similarly, products that generate positive externalities are underproduced 
in a free market because the benefi ts to society generated by the products 
(as opposed to the benefi ts that go specifi cally to consumers of the prod-
ucts) aren’t able to be captured by the producers as profi t. 
 Nudges that are benefi cial to consumers but not profi table to private 
fi rms can be viewed as a form of a public good. By this logic, govern-
ment can help society not by providing all nudges but by implementing 
those nudges that markets don’t have incentives to provide themselves 
(and potentially correcting for counterproductive nudges that markets do 
provide). In addition, as we’ve seen in several cases, governments have an 
opportunity to provide indirect incentives for private fi rms to implement 
nudges that are benefi cial to consumers. Taken this way, government- 
provided nudges would, in part, serve a similar function as existing sub-
sidies for activities that generate positive externalities, though likely at a 
much lower cost. 
 Put another way, government has a valuable role as the “nudger of last 
resort,” especially when nudges can’t or shouldn’t be limited to self-aware 
or paying customers or when nudges replace more expensive and/or dis-
tortionary subsidies and taxes. This role is not without responsibilities, 
however—namely, to maintain a fi duciary duty to the consumer’s long- 
152 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

term preferences rather than impart value judgments of what consumers’ 
long-term preferences should be and to give the market a chance to nudge 
in a helpful manner before taking over to “fi x” the situation. 
 One common criticism of using the fi ndings of behavioral economics to 
design public policy is that there is no guarantee that policy makers don’t 
suffer from the same biases and socially unproductive incentives as other 
players in the economy. 56 While this is certainly a reasonable concern, 
behavioral economists fi nd in a number of contexts that people exhibit 
fewer behavioral biases when asked to make decisions on behalf of oth-
ers, 57 which suggests that it is sometimes possible to identify a “good” 
outcome even when people can’t act on the good outcome for themselves. 
(For example, it’s not particularly controversial to say that most people 
would want to be nudged to be more active rather than less active, but 
people often choose to be less active.) 
 Other critics of government-sponsored nudging point out that many 
nudges will likely be ineffective (or inappropriate) because citizens behave 
more rationally than the government gives them credit for. 58 Nudge archi-
tects Thaler and Sunstein argue that ineffective nudges aren’t harmful 
because of their noncoercive nature, and that the worst-case scenario is 
that a nudge gets ignored. While this is true in a narrow sense, the sup-
posedly innocuous nature of nudges doesn’t imply that they shouldn’t be 
meted out judiciously. For one thing, it’s important to note that political 
capital is expended each time that a nudge is put in place, and political capi-
tal certainly shouldn’t be squandered on ineffective policies. Furthermore, 
ineffective nudges can be counterproductive in that they lower the per-
ceived power of nudges and potentially weaken both the political support 
and the consumer willingness to be subjected to future nudges. At least 
some policy makers in both the US and the UK seem to realize this, since 
their “nudge squads” are focused on evidence-based decision-making and 
randomized trials in order to determine which nudges have signifi cant 
impact before rolling them out to all citizens. 
 NOTES 
 1. Dan Ariely,  Predictably Irrational :  The Hidden Forces That Shape Our 
Decisions (New York: Harper Perennial, 2010). 
 2. Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions 
About Health ,  Wealth ,  and Happiness (New York: Penguin Books, 
2009). 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 153
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 3. The defi nition of “private fi rm” in this context excludes nongovern-
mental nonprofi t organizations, which generally are more similar to 
governments in terms of their incentives to nudge. 
 4. The use of this term refers to the concept of a Pareto improvement, 
which is a change that makes all parties involved (weakly) better off. 
 5. In economics, “rent seeking” refers to activity that merely benefi ts 
one party at the expense of another rather than creating new value or 
wealth. 
 6. Time inconsistency refers to a condition where individuals’ prefer-
ences regarding a future activity or choice change as time moves for-
ward and the point in the future gets closer. 
 7. For more, see “Highly Compensated Employee Rules Aim to Make 
401k’s Fair.”  401khelpcenter.com .  http://www.401khelpcenter.com/
mpower/feature_030702.html#.Ve59KvlVhBc . 
 8. For more, see  https://www.bankofamerica.com/deposits/manage/
keep-the-change.go . 
 9. Jeremy M. Simon, “Bank of America Sued Over ‘Keep the Change’ 
Program.”  creditcards.com .  http://www.creditcards.com/credit-
card-news/bofa-lawsuit-keep-the-changer-program-1282.php , May 
10, 2007. 
 10. Narrow choice bracketing refers to the tendency to consider decisions 
one at a time rather than in a more global context. For more, see 
Daniel Read, George Loewenstein, and Matthew Rabin, “Choice 
Bracketing,”  Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 19 (1999): 171–197. 
 11. For more on mental accounting, see Richard H. Thaler, “Mental 
Accounting Matters,”  Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 12 
(1999): 183–206. 
 12. Brigitte C. Madrian and Dennis F. Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: 
Inertia in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior,”  The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 116 (2001): 1149–87. 
 13. Sheena S. Iyengar, Wei Jiang, and Gur Huberman, “How Much 
Choice Is Too Much?: Contributions to 401(k) Retirement Plans,” 
Pension Research Council Working Paper, 2003. 
 14. For more on status-quo bias, see Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch, 
and Richard H. Thaler, “Anomalies: The Endowment Effect, Loss 
Aversion, and Status-Quo Bias,”  The Journal of Economic Perspectives 
5 (1991): 193–206. 
 15. For more on overchoice, see Sheena Iyengar and Mark Lepper, 
“When Choice Is Demotivating: Can One Desire Too Much of a 
154 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Good Thing?”  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 79 (2000): 
995–1006. 
 16. James Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian, “Reducing the 
Complexity Costs of 401(k) Participation Through Quick 
Enrollment(TM).” NBER Working Paper, 2006. 
 17. Richard H. Thaler and Shlomo Benartzi, “Save More Tomorrow: 
Using Behavioral Economics to Increase Employee Saving,”  Journal 
of Political Economy 112 (2004): S164–S187. 
 18. For more on time inconsistency and procrastination, see Ted 
O’Donoghue and Matthew Rabin, “Doing It Now or Later,”  The 
American Economic Review 89 (1999): 103–124. 
 19. For more on loss aversion, see Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch, 
and Richard H. Thaler, “Anomalies: The Endowment Effect, Loss 
Aversion, and Status-Quo Bias,”  The Journal of Economic Perspectives 
5 (1991): 193–206. 
 20. It could also be the case that consumers require the automatic nature of 
the contribution changes in order to avoid reneging on their saving plans. 
 21. This is technically not true in the case of switched digital video (SDV), 
but SDV is not yet a mainstream technology. 
 22. This is largely not yet true for streaming music, however, since creator 
compensation in that industry takes the form of a revenue share. 
 23. For more on status-quo bias, see Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch, 
and Richard H. Thaler, “Anomalies: The Endowment Effect, Loss 
Aversion, and Status-Quo Bias,”  The Journal of Economic Perspectives 
5 (1991): 193–206. 
 24. For more on salience and decision-making, see Pedro Bordalo, Nicola 
Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, “Salience and Consumer Choice,” 
 Journal of Political Economy 121 (2013): 803–843. 
 25. For example, see Stacey Paradis, “Good News: Mandated Energy 
Savings Making an Impact in Illinois.”  chicagobusiness.com .  http://
w w w. c h i c a g o b u s i n e s s . c o m / a r t i c l e / 2 0 1 3 1 2 0 3 /
OPINION/131209979/good-news-mandated-energy-savings-
making-an-impact-in-illinois , December 3, 2013. 
 26. Noah J. Goldstein, Robert B. Cialdini, and Vladas Griskevicius, “A 
Room with a Viewpoint: Using Social Norms to Motivate 
Environmental Conservation in Hotels,”  Journal of Consumer 
Research 35 (2008): 472–482. 
 27. P. Wesley Schultz, Jessica M. Nolan, Robert B. Cialdini, Noah J. 
Goldstein, and Vladas Griskevicius, “The Constructive, Destructive, 
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 155
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms,”  Psychological Science 18 
(2007): 429–434. 
 28. Ian Ayres, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih, “Evidence from Two 
Large Field Experiments That Peer Comparison Feedback Can 
Reduce Residential Energy Usage,”  Journal of Law ,  Economics ,  and 
Organization 29 (2013): 992–1022. 
 29. Dora L. Costa and Matthew E. Kahn, “Energy Conservation ‘Nudges’ 
and Environmentalist Ideology: Evidence from a Randomized 
Residential Electricity Field Experiment,” NBER Working Paper, 
revised January 2015. 
 30. For more, see Noah J. Goldstein, Robert B. Cialdini, and Vladas 
Griskevicius, “A Room with a Viewpoint: Using Social Norms to 
Motivate Environmental Conservation in Hotels,”  Journal of 
Consumer Research 35 (2008): 472–482. 
 31. For more, see Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, “Prospect 
Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk,”  Econometrica 47 
(1979): 263–292. 
 32. Kevin G. Volpp, George Loewenstein, Andrea B. Troxel, Jalpa Doshi, 
Maureen Price, Mitchell Laskin, and Stephen E. Kimmel, “A Test of 
Financial Incentives to Improve Wayfarin Adherence,”  BMC Health 
Services Research 8 (2008). 
 33. For more, see  https://www.change.org/p/oracle-corporation-stop-
bundling-ask-toolbar-with-the-java-installer . 
 34. For more on this reference, see the Season 4 Episode 4 of  Friends —
“The One with the Ballroom Dancing.” 
 35. Laura Northrup, “Gym Business Models Depend on You Being Too 
Lazy to Work Out.”  consumerist.com .  http://consumerist.com/
2014/12/18/gym-business-models-depend-on-you-being-too-
lazy-to-work-out/ , December 18, 2014. 
 36. For more on sunk costs and subsequent consumption, see Richard H. 
Thaler, “Mental Accounting Matters,”  Journal of Behavioral Decision 
Making 12 (1999): 183–206. 
 37. Stefano DellaVigna and Ulrike Malmendier, “Paying Not to Go to 
the Gym,”  The American Economic Review 96 (2006): 694–719. 
 38. This can technically be explained either by a form of mental account-
ing or by irrationally high discounting of future benefi ts. 
 39. See  www.renttherunway.com . 
 40. Achal Bassamboo, Sunil Kumar, and Ramandeep S. Randhawa, 
“Dynamics of New Product Introduction in Closed Rental Systems,” 
 Operations Research 57 (2009): 1347–1359. 
156 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 41. See Katherine L. Milkman, Todd Rogers, and Max H. Bazerman, 
“Highbrow Films Gather Dust: Time-Inconsistent Preferences and 
Online DVD Rentals,”  Management Science 55 (2009): 1047–1059. 
 42. Lisa L. Shu, Nina Mazar, Francesca Gino, Dan Ariely, and Max 
Bazerman, “Signing at the Beginning Makes Ethics Salient and 
Decreases Dishonest Self-reports in Comparison to Signing at the 
End,”  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (2012): 
15197–15200. 
 43. Brigitte C. Madrian and Dennis F. Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: 
Inertia in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior,”  The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 116 (2001): 1149–87. 
 44. For background, see Chris Dolmetsch, “New York Big-Soda Ban 
Rejected by State’s Highest Court.”  Bloomberg.com .  http://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-06-26/new-york-big-soda-
ban-rejected-by-n-y-top-court-as-overreach , June 26, 2014. 
 45. Janet Schwartz, Jason Riis, Brian Elbel, and Dan Ariely, “Inviting 
Consumers to Downsize Fast-Food Portions Signifi cantly Reduces 
Calorie Consumption,”  Health Affairs 31 (2012): 399–407. 
 46. Technically, availability bias refers to bias arising from the use of a 
heuristic where people view more easily recalled or imagined events as 
being more likely to occur, but it also applies to situations where 
more recent or available information is overweighted in the decision-
making process. 
 47. Michael Moss, “Nudged to the Produce Aisle by a Look in the 
Mirror,”  The New York Times , August 27, 2013. 
 48. Bram Van Den Bergh, Julien Schmitt, and Luk Warlop, “Embodied 
Myopia,”  Journal of Marketing Research 48 (2011): 1033–1044. 
 49. Drazen Prelec and Duncan Simester, “Always Leave Home Without 
It: A Further Investigation of the Credit-Card Effect on Willingness 
to Pay,”  Marketing Letters 12 (2001): 5–12. 
 50. For more, see  www.stickk.com . 
 51. For more, see “Allianz Tool Gives Retirement Plans a Checkup.” 
 ThinkAdvisor.com . 
 http://www.thinkadvisor.com/2012/09/17/
allianz-tool-gives-retirement-plans-a-checkup , September 17, 2012. 
 52. Patrick Wintour, “Government’s Behaviour Insight Team to Become 
a Mutual and Sell Services.”  TheGuardian.com .  http://www.the-
guardian.com/politics/2014/feb/05/government-behaviour-
insight-nudge-mutual-nesta-funding , February 4, 2014. 
 53.  Behavioural Insights Team Annual Update 2010–11 .  https://www.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
PRIVATE-SECTOR NUDGING 157
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

fi le/60537/Behaviour-Change-Insight-Team-Annual-Update_acc.
pdf . 
 54. Amy Finkelstein, “E-ZTax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates,”  The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2009): 969–1010. 
 55. That is, are not excludable, in economic terms. 
 56. For example, see  http://thepsychreport.com/essays-discussion/
nudge-review-cass-sunsteins-why-nudge/ . 
 57. For example, see Brian J. Zikmnud-Fisher, Brianna Sarr, Angela 
Fagerlin, and Peter A. Ubel, “A Matter of Perspective: Choosing for 
Others Differs from Choosing for Yourself in Making Treatment 
Decisions,”  Journal of General Internal Medicine 21 (2006): 
618–622. 
 58. For example, see  http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/the-
richness-of-personal-interests-a-neglected-aspect-of-the-nudge-
debate/ . 
158 
J.N. BEGGS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

159
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_7
 Who Should Nudge? 
 Sherzod   Abdukadirov 
 INTRODUCTION 
 In a follow-up to the highly infl uential  Nudge , 1 one of the book’s coauthors, 
Cass Sunstein, asks “ Why Nudge ?” in order make his case for the utility of 
nudges in solving many social problems. 2 In the new volume, he expands 
on the key ideas fi rst mentioned in “ Nudge ” and takes an opportunity to 
respond to his critics. He argues, quite convincingly, that the insights of 
behavioral economics could be crucial if we are to address pressing social 
issues including health, safety, environment, and retirement savings. 
 There is, however, one question which Sunstein fails to address but 
which is crucial to his case for government nudge policy. The question is 
not “why” but “who” should nudge. As I will demonstrate in this chapter, 
the answer to this question has major implications for the government’s 
role in developing nudges that would help consumers improve their health 
and well-being. 
 Throughout his works, Sunstein assumes that the primary respon-
sibility for nudging consumers should fall on the government. 3 To the 
argument that markets already provide consumers with useful nudges, 
 S.  Abdukadirov () 
 Mercatus Center at  George Mason University ,  Arlington ,  VA ,  USA 
 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Sunstein replies that government nudges complement market efforts. He 
draws no distinction between government and private sector nudges and 
in fact asserts that in some cases markets may not have the right incentives 
to produce effective nudges. 
 Sunstein implicitly assumes that both governments and private fi rms 
can be equally effi cient in producing nudges—he focuses exclusively on 
their incentives to create nudges and not on their ability to do so. In this 
chapter, I examine this assumption. In the second section, I describe the 
different processes that companies follow in creating new products and 
examine which process is more appropriate for designing nudges. In the 
third section, I describe the regulatory process and examine how well it 
fi ts the task of designing nudges. I analyze the challenges that federal and 
local governments face in designing effective nudges. In the fourth sec-
tion, I contrast the regulatory process with the process used by the private 
sector. Finally in the fi fth section, I argue that producing effective nudges 
requires a more fl exible, iterative approach, which the regulatory process 
cannot accommodate. Consequently, the business of nudging should be 
left to the private sector. 
 Note that I focus only on the ability of private and public sectors to design 
effective nudges. While there are important ethical issues related to both 
regulatory and market nudges, they are outside the scope of this chapter. 
 DESIGNING NUDGES 
 Disagreements on the effectiveness or even desirability of nudges often 
hinge on the difference in what scholars or policymakers mean by nudges. 
For example, when some nudge critics pointed to New York City’s ban 
on large size soda containers as an example of how nudges can go wrong, 4 
Thaler replied that the ban was not a nudge. 5 In order to avoid the confu-
sion, I will start the chapter by defi ning the terms regulatory nudge and 
market nudge the way I use them in this chapter. 
 Regulatory Nudges 
 Sunstein and Thaler popularized the term nudge to refer to the use 
of behavioral science insights in order to change people’s behavior. 
Importantly, the authors insisted that nudges must be choice preserving—
consumers should have the ability to opt out of the nudge and the cost of 
opting out should be trivial to consumers. 
160 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 However, many proposed and implemented policies inspired by 
Sunstein and Thaler’s work skirted the second condition. While the poli-
cies used behavioral insights to manipulate consumers’ choice to change 
behavior, they frequently imposed nontrivial costs on those who wanted 
to opt out of the nudge. The term nudge came to be used to describe any 
policy that aims to change consumer behavior through behavioral eco-
nomics, regardless of whether it is choice preserving or not. 
 In this chapter, I similarly use the term regulatory nudge in its broader 
sense in order to discuss any regulatory policies that use behavioral eco-
nomics to change consumer behavior. 
 Market Nudges 
 Private companies have long used behavioral sciences in their product 
design and marketing to infl uence consumers. 6 These behavioral technol-
ogies can take a form similar to regulatory nudges and explicitly attempt 
to change consumer behavior. For example, energy data analytics com-
pany Opower teams up with utility companies to provide consumers feed-
back on their energy use on their utility bill. 7 In addition to consumers’ 
own energy use, the bill includes the energy use of their neighbors. Thus, 
Opower uses social norms to get consumer to save energy. 
 Alternatively, behavioral technologies can help consumers simply by 
redesigning their products to limit human errors. For example, a medi-
cal device startup Vitality designed medicine bottles that begin to glow if 
a patient forgets to take the prescription medication. 8 The product does 
not exploit behavioral biases to counter consumers’ other biases. Yet, it is 
informed by behavioral sciences, which point out that cognitive capacity 
is a limited resource. 
 In some cases, these behavioral technologies benefi t both the compa-
nies and consumers; in others, they increase the companies’ bottom line at 
consumers’ expense. 9 For simplicity, I will use the term market nudge for 
all types of behavioral technologies. 
 Market Incentives 
 Sunstein assumes that markets do not have incentives to address certain prob-
lems caused by behavioral biases, and consequently, only  governments are in 
a position to solve these problems. 10 While it is not spelled out, Sunstein’s 
argument seems to rest on two assumptions. The fi rst assumption is that 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 161
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

consumers are unaware of their biases or the impact those biases have on 
their health or fi nances. Consequently, they do not demand solutions for 
these problems. The second assumption is that the interests of consum-
ers and companies do not align. Thus, companies face strong incentives to 
nudge consumers away from choices that are better for consumers. 
 However, the conditions that must be met under Sunstein’s assump-
tions for markets to respond to consumers’ needs are unnecessarily strict. 
While consumers may not fully understand or be aware of the different 
biases that lead them astray, they can easily observe the outcomes—excess 
weight, low savings rate, high energy bill, and so on. For markets to work 
and supply the helpful nudges, consumers need not fully understand why 
and how their decisions are suboptimal; they need only to be aware that 
they have a problem. It is the nudge designers’ task to fi gure out what 
behavioral biases lead to the problematic outcome and how to counter 
these biases. 
 Similarly, the assertion that private companies lack incentives to nudge 
consumers toward better choices focuses too narrowly on the companies 
where the “bad” choices happen. For example, retailers have strong incen-
tives to get consumers to spend more money, which may confl ict with the 
consumers’ interest in increasing their savings. This is taken as evidence 
that markets are unlikely to nudge consumers to save. 
 However, the fact that some companies have incentives that confl ict with 
consumers’ best interest does not mean that all companies face the same 
confl ict. Consumers who wish to save more can readily subscribe to a num-
ber of personal fi nance tools that will help them achieve their goal. Many of 
these tools explicitly use behavioral technologies to help consumers over-
come biases. The same is true with obesity. While food companies and super-
markets may want consumers to purchase more food, numerous weight-loss 
companies work to help consumers eat healthier or exercise more. 
 As chapters in this volume demonstrate, there are numerous examples 
of market nudges competing with regulatory nudges to supply solutions. 
Thus, markets clearly provide incentives for companies to produce effec-
tive nudges helping consumers address their behavioral biases. 
 Models of Innovation 
 When designing nudges, both regulators and private fi rms attempt to take 
novel insights from behavioral economics and transform them into func-
tional products or services for consumers. Yet, the process of going from 
162 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

ideas to functional products is rarely straightforward. In fact, only one out 
of six new ideas that companies decide to invest in ever becomes a successful 
commercial product; the rest are screened out at various stages of product 
development. 11 Even when a new product is launched commercially, there is 
no guarantee of success—approximately 40 % of new products fail. 12 
 Depending on the complexity of the product and the amount of 
knowledge and information required to produce it, the innovation pro-
cess follows either a linear or an interactive model. 13 The linear model is 
characterized by an orderly progression of information from research, to 
design, to manufacturing, and fi nally to marketing and distribution (see 
Fig.  1 ). 14 The process follows only in one direction with the outcomes 
of the earlier stage serving as inputs in the following stage. Each stage 
is neatly self-contained and separated from the others and actors at each 
stage have no need to interact with each other.
 On the other side of the spectrum is the interactive model of innova-
tion, which is characterized by frequent interactions between actors within 
different stages (see Fig.  2 ). In this model, information fl ows both ways 
with feedback from the later stages informing the earlier ones. In addition 
to intrafi rm communication, many researchers and engineers frequently 
interact and share knowledge with their colleagues from rival fi rms. 15 
Finally, end users are a crucial source of information and new ideas for 
many companies. 16 
 Most importantly, the interactive model includes an additional stage 
between applied research and manufacturing—an iterative redesign and test-
ing stage. Designers have to compensate for gaps in knowledge with contin-
uous experimentation. 17 As they discover through trial and error some of the 
Research
Design & 
Development
Producon
Markeng & 
Sales
 Fig. 1  Linear Model of Innovation  
Research
Design & 
Development
Test & 
Redesign
Producon
Markeng & 
Sales
 Fig. 2  Interactive Model of Innovation 
 
 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 163
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

information that they missed in the earlier iteration, they update their design 
based on new knowledge. Some companies go beyond experimenting with 
new ideas to actually experimenting with the very process of innovation. 18 
They seek to increase the effectiveness of their experimentation process. 
 The state of knowledge determines whether the innovation process will 
follow a linear or interactive model. Some issues are well researched and 
experts can accurately predict the outcomes of innovations in these fi elds. 
In these cases, the innovation process is closer to the linear model. In con-
trast, some innovations occur in areas that are still poorly understood or 
where knowledge cannot be easily codifi ed and transferred from one stage 
to another. These innovations follow the process that closely resembles the 
interactive model. 
 The linear model is more typical for the chemical and pharmaceutical 
industries. 19 For example, the concerns over the impact of chlorofl uorocar-
bons (CFCs) on depletion of the ozone layer led the USA and many other 
countries to phase out their use in consumer products such as aerosols 
and refrigerants. 20 DuPont, one of the largest CFC producers, responded 
to the CFC ban by developing alternative compounds that would not 
interact with ozone. In this case, the basic science of chemical interactions 
was well researched. Building on the fundamental scientifi c knowledge, 
DuPont scientists conducted extensive applied research to identify a par-
ticular chemical compound that would have the same useful qualities of 
CFCs but without their harmful impact on ozone. 21 Once the scientists 
identifi ed the alternatives, DuPont used its existing knowledge in chemical 
production in order to produce and distribute the CFC substitute. 
 In contrast, the interactive model is more typical for consumer prod-
ucts, especially in cases where consumers’ preferences and environment 
can impact the product’s success. In a famous example, Coca Cola decided 
to replace its classic drink with a new version in 1983—just in time for 
the iconic drink’s 100th birthday. 22 The early consumer tests clearly indi-
cated that consumers liked the new coke and preferred its taste to the 
original. What the company did not expect was the emotional attachment 
that many American’s felt to the soda drink. After an uproar, the company 
backtracked and brought back the original version of coke. The newer 
version, rebranded as Coke II, languished for a while before it was dis-
continued. In this case, all upfront research pointed to the success of the 
new coke. Yet, the real-world test revealed its shortcomings—inability to 
engender the same emotional response as the original coke. Consumer 
feedback informed the decision to revert to the original coke. 
164 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Uncertainty in Designing Nudges 
 Whether designing effective nudges requires a linear or interactive model 
of innovation depends on the amount of uncertainty that designers face. 
When it comes to designing nudges, regulators face uncertainty at various 
stages of innovation. 
 First is our incomplete understanding of the basic science behind behav-
ioral biases. While we do have evidence that people do not behave ratio-
nally, behavioral scientists have yet to develop a comprehensive theory that 
describes how people do behave. 23 For many decisions, there are often 
several different biases that could plausibly infl uence a person’s decision. 
Some of these might push the person to make the decision too hastily, 
while others may cause her to procrastinate. Yet as the economist David 
K. Levine put it “The world doesn’t need a thousand different theories to 
explain a thousand different facts. At some point there needs to be a dis-
cipline of trying to explain many facts with one theory.” 24 Unfortunately, 
behavioral economists have yet to develop a cohesive theory that would 
tell us which if any biases are present and how they interact with each 
other. Thus, a regulator deciding which biases may be at work in a given 
context would necessarily base her decision on a set of assumptions, which 
may prove to be incorrect. 
 Energy and fuel effi ciency regulations are one area where uncertainty 
regarding behavioral biases play out. Over the last decade, the Department 
of Energy has issued a series of regulations requiring higher energy effi -
ciency standards on commercial and consumer appliances. 25 Similarly, the 
Department of Transportation and the Environmental Protection Agency 
issued a joint regulation to mandate higher fuel effi ciency standards for 
cars and trucks. 26 In both cases, the federal agencies attempted to solve the 
so-called energy paradox. The energy paradox, also known as the energy 
effi ciency gap, is a phenomenon identifi ed in numerous studies, which 
show that consumers undervalue the future energy costs when they pur-
chase new appliances. 27 Consequently, they opt for appliances that have 
a lower sticker price but are also less energy effi cient, even though the 
appliances would cost consumers more in the long term due to higher 
operation costs. In behavioral terms, the consumers are essentially pres-
ent biased. They overvalue the present, that is, lower appliance price, and 
undervalue the future, that is, energy costs of running the appliance. 
 Yet, not everyone is convinced by the present bias explanation of 
consumer choices. Economists Hunt Alcott and Michael Greenstone 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 165
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 questioned whether the energy effi ciency gap even exists. 28 The authors 
point out that the potential energy savings are based on engineering analy-
ses, which can overstate potential savings by a substantial amount. In addi-
tion, appliances typically differ on more than just energy consumption. 
More energy-effi cient appliances tend to be smaller and incorporate fewer 
amenities. Consumers who purchase less-effi cient appliances might in fact 
be making a rational choice; they purchase the model that has the desired 
features that an energy-effi cient model does not. 
 The point here is not to claim that one side or the other is mistaken. 
Rather, it is to show how diffi cult it can be to determine whether consumer 
choices are driven by behavioral biases. In the case of energy effi ciency 
regulations, the federal agencies assumed that the observed reticence on 
the part of consumers to choose energy-effi cient appliances was driven by 
behavioral biases rather than rational trade-offs or other unobserved vari-
ables. The evidence on this issue is still far from settled. 
 The second source of uncertainty enters at the design stage. For many 
proposed nudges, behavioral scientists test their impact in the lab. But 
lab settings rarely recreate the full decision-making environment; instead, 
they focus on a few key elements that researchers think are important to 
the experiment. Yet, if they miss a key variable that can infl uence consum-
ers’ decisions, the study’s results could be misleading and not replicated in 
the real-world setting. 
 This is what innovation scholar Eric von Hippel calls the problem with 
“sticky” information. 29 Since people who will use nudges are not the same 
people who design them, the information about the environment in which 
the nudges will operate has to be transferred from users to designers. Yet, 
much of this information is diffi cult to transfer. In some cases, the relevant 
information is tacit and is hard to codify. Imagine, for example, if you had 
to explain to someone how to ride a bike. You clearly have that knowl-
edge since you can ride bikes, but transferring that knowledge to someone 
would be diffi cult. 
 In other cases, the necessary information may be diffi cult to access, par-
ticularly when decisions are not entirely rational. What consumers say they 
will do and what they actually do can often differ substantially. This is what is 
known as hypothetical bias—the difference between the stated and revealed 
preferences. 30 In addition, the very process of eliciting preferences in a lab 
setting can change the way people respond to particular circumstances. 31 
 The problem with sticky knowledge may be exacerbated in the behav-
ioral context. One of the key insights of behavioral economics is that 
166 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

consumer decisions may be affected by seemingly irrelevant informa-
tion. 32 This makes the job of identifying the information that needs to 
be included to develop a successful nudge much harder. Consequently, 
as Steve Wendel in this volume points out, behavioral nudges are often 
sensitive to precise implementation. For example, consumer responses to 
a selection menu may easily change due to changes in wording or in the 
preceding questions due to priming effects. 
 Finally, the users may omit some crucial information simply because 
there is so much information that is potentially relevant that transferring 
all of it would be cost prohibitive. 33 Predicting what information is actually 
important to the new product development is often diffi cult. 
 Take, for instance, the power of defaults often touted by Sunstein and 
Thaler as a powerful tool to unobtrusively change behavior. 34 In one well- 
publicized application, behavioral economists Richard Thaler and Shlomo 
Benarzi used the power of defaults to increase employees’ retirement sav-
ings rate through the Save More Tomorrow (SMT) scheme. 35 They set up 
a simple plan that would automatically increase the retirement savings rate 
for employees by a small percentage each year until the overall savings rate 
reached a target level. The increase in the savings rate would coincide with 
pay raises to minimize the visible impact of the increase. Thus, for many 
employees, the take-home pay would remain roughly the same before and 
after the pay raise, with most of the pay raise going toward retirement sav-
ings. Throughout the program, employees could choose to opt out at any 
point; yet only a few dropped out. This simple plan, which the authors tested 
in several organizations, drastically improved employee retirement savings. 
 Encouraged by SMT’s success, other researchers sought to use the 
power of defaults to increase the savings rate among low-income individu-
als. 36 In a fi eld experiment, low-income tax fi lers were assigned into two 
groups. In the fi rst group, tax fi lers could choose to invest some of their 
tax refund into US Savings Bonds. For the fi lers in the second group, a 
portion of the tax refund was automatically invested in the US Savings 
Bonds, but the fi lers could choose to opt out and receive the money in 
hand. Thus, the default for the second group was to save their refunds. 
 In contrast to the SMT scheme, the default saving scheme did not 
work for the low-income tax fi lers. Most fi lers in the default saving groups 
chose to opt out of the savings scheme, preferring to receive the entire 
amount in hand. Researchers hypothesized that, unlike SMT participants, 
low- income tax fi lers did not intend to save their tax refunds. In fact, 
many fi lers had specifi c plans to spend their refunds. Thus, default-based 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 167
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

nudges may only work when they encourage actions that consumers 
intended but failed to take due to procrastination. The importance of 
intention as a key variable only became apparent in a specifi c setting. It 
would have been diffi cult to predict its importance based on the Thaler 
and Benartzi study alone. 
 The third source of uncertainty comes at the production or, in the 
case of government, rulemaking stage. With few exceptions, regulatory 
agencies do not actually nudge consumers. Instead, they require the pri-
vate companies that sell products or otherwise interact with consumers to 
nudge their consumers. For example, if a fi nancial regulator were to issue 
a rule mandating the SMT plan, it would be the human resource depart-
ments across the private sector that would change the procedures to set 
new retirement savings defaults. This means that regulators face the same 
“sticky” information problem with the numerous fi rms that would have 
to implement the nudges within their specifi c environments as they do 
with the end users of these nudges. While the rulemaking process offers 
these fi rms a chance to provide feedback to regulators, the sheer volume 
of information that could potentially be relevant makes it impossible to 
relate all of it. 
 This was the case with the overdraft protection regulation issued by the 
Federal Reserve Board (FRB). 37 When consumers either pay or take out 
cash from their checking account using debit cards, many banks honor 
the transaction even if consumers do not have suffi cient funds left on their 
account to cover the purchase amount. Instead, they charge consumers 
a fee for overdrawing on their account. The fees can be quite steep—
an average overdraft fee in 2006 was $27, by 2011 the fees increased to 
$35—and provide a substantial source of profi ts for banks. 38 
 While one could easily imagine scenarios where paying high over-
draft fees would be a rational choice (e.g., in case of emergencies), in 
most cases consumers have better alternatives. For example, they could 
open an overdraft line of credit or link their checking account to a saving 
account. 39 Both would result in considerably lower fees for overdrawing 
on the checking account. Alternatively, they could choose to forego the 
purchase by instructing their bank to deny transactions if they do not have 
suffi cient funds to cover them. In a 2012 poll, 90 % of consumers who 
incurred overdraft fees reported that they overdrew their account by mis-
take. 40 Had they known about the potential fees at the time of purchase, 
they might have either postponed their purchase or chosen an alternative 
payment method. 
168 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 The challenge facing the FRB was to help consumers avoid unneces-
sary overdraft fees while still allowing the transaction for consumers who 
truly need to overdraw on their account. The agency decided to use the 
power of defaults to address the situation. Prior to its 2010 regulation, 
most banks would allow consumers to overdraw their accounts but charge 
them an overdraft protection fee. Consumers would have to actively 
instruct their banks to deny overdraft transactions. In contrast, the FRB 
regulation required that by default banks deny all overdraft transactions. 
Consumers now have to actively sign up for overdraft protection. The 
agency reasoned that, by using defaults, it would allow those consumers 
who incurred overdraft fees by mistake to avoid the fees in the future, 
while the consumers who need the overdraft protection would still have 
that option available to them. 
 The regulation’s outcomes were unexpected. Even though 75 % of con-
sumers who reported overdrawing their accounts preferred to have their 
transactions denied rather than pay a $35 overdraft fee, 41 almost half of 
heavy overdraft users signed up for the overdraft protection. 42 The num-
bers were slightly lower for moderate and infrequent users. Incidentally, 
this is another example of the diffi culties that nudge designers face in try-
ing to elicit consumers’ preferences. 
 The FRB failed to anticipate the environment in which the regulation 
would be enforced. By using defaults, the FRB intended to simplify con-
sumers’ choices; yet the regulation only added to confusion. The default 
to deny overdraft transactions applies only to debit card transactions; 
banks continue covering overdraft charges incurred through checks. Yet in 
a survey, nearly two-thirds of respondents who chose to change the default 
mistakenly believed that their checks would bounce for insuffi cient funds 
if they did not opt in for overdraft protection. 43 The fact that some banks 
refer to debit cards as “check cards” may have added to the confusion. 
In addition, 60 % of respondents mistakenly believed that they would be 
charged a fee for denied debit transactions. 
 Most importantly, the FRB failed to anticipate the steps that banks 
might take in order to subvert the impact of defaults. While not all banks 
pursued overdraft fees, those that did were quite effective in getting 
consumers, especially heavy overdraft users, to actively sign up for the 
overdraft protection. They did so by framing overdraft as a free perk. 44 
Alternatively, they urged consumers to sign up or risk losing the protec-
tion that they currently enjoy, effectively framing the default option as a 
loss. They also made it extraordinarily easy for customers to opt in. 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 169
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 While it may be tempting to assert that the banks’ reaction was predict-
able, it is important to note that not all banks acted in the same fashion. 
In fact, many banks chose not to pursue overdraft fee revenues and turned 
toward other services instead. In addition, the FRB did expect to see some 
attempts to subvert the regulation. 45 To that end, it required banks to get 
an explicit consumer request in order to sign them up for the service. It 
also required banks to offer consumers the same terms of service on check-
ing accounts regardless of their overdraft protection choice. Yet, these 
safeguards proved insuffi cient. The goal here is not to fault the FRB for 
poor analysis; rather, it is to point out that it was extremely diffi cult to 
predict how banks would ultimately implement the regulation. 
 NUDGING THROUGH REGULATION 
 Both private fi rms and government regulators face a great deal of uncer-
tainty when designing nudges. Government attempts to create nudges 
through regulation have to follow an elaborate and rigid process. Both 
at the federal and local levels, the regulatory process has clearly defi ned 
sequential steps and involves numerous stakeholders—often wielding veto 
powers—who ultimately have little connection to the actual end users 
of the regulatory nudges. Effectively, the rulemaking process follows a 
strictly linear model of innovation. The problems that arise from applying 
this process on the federal and local level are described below. 
 Federal Nudges 
 The specifi c rulemaking requirements differ depending on the agency issu-
ing the regulation, the statutory language authorizing the regulation, and 
the economic costs or signifi cance of the regulation. 46 Broadly, rulemaking 
follows the following steps. First, every regulation starts in Congress with 
a statute authorizing a federal agency to issue a regulation. Regulations are 
laws and all legislative powers are vested in Congress. Agencies cannot issue 
regulations on their own; for every regulation, they must point to the autho-
rizing congressional statute. Typically, congressional authorization is broad 
and leaves agencies considerable discretion in implementing the statute. 
 Upon receiving congressional authorization, agencies must interpret con-
gressional intent and design the specifi c regulation. In designing the regula-
tion, agencies draw on their subject matter expertise as well as research from 
academia and industry. In addition, they typically conduct an economic 
170 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

analysis to fi gure out the most practical and most effi cient solutions to the 
problem. Once they have that analysis, they propose the regulation. 
 At fi rst the proposed regulation goes to the White House Offi ce of 
Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) for review. At this stage, 
the proposed regulation undergoes presidential oversight. Once OIRA 
reviews the regulatory analysis, it returns the proposal with its comments 
and suggestions, which agencies generally implement. 
 At this point, the proposed regulation goes to the next stage—the com-
menting process. Agencies publish the proposed regulation in the Federal 
Register and open the regulation for public comments. The commenting 
period typically lasts several weeks. During this time, any interested party 
can transmit their support, reservations, or concerns with the regulation 
directly to the agency. Unsurprisingly, the process tends to be dominated 
by organized groups. 47 Once the commenting period closes, agencies 
comb through the comments they have received and decide how and if 
they should respond. They incorporate the suggestions and then issue the 
fi nal regulation, which goes through another round of OIRA review. 
 Once it passes the OIRA review, the rule becomes fi nal. In theory, 
Congress can invalidate the regulation through a joint resolution within 
a short time frame immediately after the rule becomes fi nal. In practice, 
Congress used this procedure only once to disapprove a controversial 
ergonomics rule. 48 After this step, the rule goes into effect and agencies 
begin to enforce it. 
 However, some rules get challenged in court. If a party affected by 
the regulation believes that the agency did not follow all the proce-
dural requirements of the rulemaking process or have proper congres-
sional authorization, it can sue the agency. The courts can invalidate the 
 regulation, forcing the agency to go back to the proposal stage and correct 
its shortcomings. 
 Finally, for some regulations, agencies go back and conduct a retro-
spective review, typically fi ve or ten years after the regulation took effect. 
Retrospective review may be required by statute or initiated by agencies 
voluntarily. The review stage gives agencies an opportunity to correct 
potential mistakes or to fi ne-tune the regulation. 
 This is the process that the federal agencies have to follow in order to 
issue regulatory nudges. So how does it work out in practice? Let’s start 
with an example of a nudge policy that came directly from Congress—the 
Vending Machine rule. 49 In addition to hotly debated provisions related to 
insurance coverage, the Affordable Care Act (ACA) contained a provision 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 171
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

that required all vending machines to display a calorie count for each sold 
item next to the selection button. 50 The provision only applied to vending 
machines where the Nutrition Facts Panel was not clearly visible to con-
sumers prior to purchase. In addition, the provision applied to businesses 
that owned 20 or more vending machines. 
 The statute itself provides few clues as to what motivated Congress 
to impose the calorie-posting requirement on vending machines, but the 
FDA’s analysis clearly describes the regulation as an attempt to nudge con-
sumers to make healthier food choices. 51 Importantly, the FDA explicitly 
states that it does not see information asymmetry, a traditional case of mar-
ket failure, as the main cause for this regulation. The agency acknowledges 
that in a competitive vending machine market businesses would gladly 
post calorie counts if consumers wanted to see them. Thus, it is the fact 
that consumers do not care about calorie count information when pur-
chasing snacks that the FDA sees as the problem. Consumers, the agency 
argues, are too present biased and fail to account for the long-term conse-
quences of their snack purchases. Consequently, they need to be nudged 
toward a healthier choice through calorie posting. 
 First, consider the timeline for this relatively simple nudge. Congress 
passed the ACA in March 2010. Then it took the FDA over four years to 
weave its way through the regulatory process and issue a fi nal regulation. 52 
The rule will not take effect until May 2017. Thus, it will take the federal 
government almost seven years to implement the nudge. 
 Beyond implementation, the FDA is required to review the regulation 
since it impacts many small businesses. But the agency does not have to 
perform the review for at least ten years after the rule becomes fi nal. Thus, 
the next time the FDA will revisit the rule to see if it made any difference 
may not happen until 2024. 
 As the rule is yet to take effect, there is no data to judge its effective-
ness. However, there are several areas of concern that may jeopardize the 
rule’s ability to nudge consumers toward healthier choices. First is the 
fact that the nudge was not supported by any research. While it would 
have been relatively easy for the FDA to test whether the proposed nudge 
would actually work, the agency chose not to conduct any research. In 
response to public comments questioning whether the rule will actually 
lead to healthier food choices, the FDA simply stated that it is statutorily 
required to issue the rule. 53 
 Second, it remains unclear what goals the rule aims to accomplish. 
For example, it makes sense to give consumers nutrition information for 
172 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

different foods at the supermarket. There, consumers face a great variety 
of choices and can use the nutrition information to opt for more nutri-
tious and less caloric foods. But it is not clear what would constitute a 
healthy choice for a consumer standing in front a soda or candy vending 
machine. The regulation does not explain whether it expects consumers 
to walk away without a purchase or to seek out a less unhealthy junk food. 
Crucially, the regulation does not explain why consumers who clearly 
express no interest in calorie counts at the vending machines would some-
how change their behavior in response to posted calories. 
 Third, it is unclear why the rule should apply only to businesses with 20 
or more vending machines and what impact this exception may have on 
the rule’s effectiveness. The main goal for this condition is to avoid impos-
ing the regulation on small businesses. From the political and economic 
perspective, the provision makes sense. Politicians generally do not like 
to impose regulations that may impact small businesses. Consequently, 
they tried to shield small businesses from regulation through regulatory 
statutes including the Regulatory Flexibility Act and the Small Business 
Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act. Excluding the very small local busi-
nesses from the regulation’s reach makes the regulation more palatable to 
policymakers. In addition, the exclusion reduces the cost of the regula-
tion. Compliance for smaller vending machine owners could be prohibi-
tively costly, driving many out of businesses. By focusing on the larger 
businesses, the regulation limits its negative impacts on the economy. 
 Notice, however, that neither political nor economic considerations 
refl ect the interests of consumers. From the consumers’ perspective, the 
size of the business that owns the vending machines is irrelevant. If the 
regulation were effective in nudging consumers to make better choices, 
the consumers would want to have these nudges available at every vending 
machine where they shop. I am not suggesting that political and economic 
considerations in the regulatory process are not important. I am only 
pointing out that the regulatory process is designed to refl ect the interests 
of the various stakeholders and not necessarily those of the consumers. 
 Ultimately, the rule is unlikely to change consumers’ behavior and 
improve their diet. The lack of evidence supporting the nudge, combined 
with its limited applicability, reduces the probability that the rule will 
achieve its goal. At the same time, it imposes considerable costs on vending 
machine owners who have to bear the burden of implementing the rule. 
 One could plausibly argue that the Vending Machine rule’s shortcom-
ings were specifi c to congressionally designed nudges—Congress may lack 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 173
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

the expertise to design effective nudges. 54 Thus, a better approach would 
be for Congress to instruct the federal agencies to come up with nudges 
and leave the details to the agency experts. However, the FRB’s overdraft 
protection regulation described earlier shows that federal agencies are not 
necessarily more effective nudge designers. 
 While the concerns over the impact of overdraft fees were building up 
for some time, the Board fi rst began working on the overdraft regula-
tion in 2008. 55 In the original form, the regulation would have required 
banks to allow customers an opportunity to opt out of the overdraft 
protection before enrolling them in the service. Based on the feedback it 
received, the Board decided to change the regulation in favor of making 
the opt-out a default choice. In the modifi ed regulation issued in 2009, 
consumers had to actively sign up for overdraft protection. The rule took 
effect in 2010. 
 In contrast to the FDA, the Board conducted several consumer studies 
prior to issuing a fi nal regulation. Yet, as the previous section describes, 
the agency faced considerable uncertainty with regard to the implementa-
tion and banks’ responses to the regulation. As a result, the nudge had a 
smaller impact than originally anticipated. 
 In 2010, the newly formed Consumer Finance Protection Bureau 
(CFPB) took the issue over from the Federal Reserve. 56 In 2012, the 
CFPB launched an inquiry into the effectiveness of the regulation, pub-
lishing its fi ndings in a 2013 report and in a 2014 follow-up report. 57 It 
found that for customers who stuck with the default option, the regula-
tion drastically reduced fee payments. However, for customers who chose 
to sign up for the service, the total fees actually increased since the banks 
increased their overdraft fees in response to falling revenues. Five years 
after the rule took effect, the agency has yet to initiate any changes to 
the regulation despite the documented problems with its implementation. 
Note, however, that the CFPB launched the review at its own initiative; 
the agency is not required to review the regulation until 2020. 
 State and Local Nudges 
 Beyond the federal regulators, local governments tend to be most active 
in nudging consumers. State-level regulatory nudges are currently less 
common. Most state and municipal governments have a version of the 
rulemaking process that is modeled after the federal one, although con-
siderable variations exist between states and municipalities. 58 Typically, the 
174 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

state or local processes are less stringent than the federal one. Let’s con-
sider two examples of local government nudges. 
 The New York City’s Administrative Procedure Act outlines procedural 
requirements for municipal agencies issuing new rules. 59 Similar to the 
federal process, the NYC’s process requires agencies to publish the rule 
in advance and allow ample time for public hearings and deliberations. 
But it has no provisions requiring agencies to provide analysis of the new 
rule’s impact nor does it provide for external regulatory oversight similar 
to OIRA or congressional review. In addition, it lacks any provisions for 
retrospective analysis, which means that city regulators do not have to 
revisit their regulations to check if they could be improved. In general, the 
process involves fewer steps and is faster than federal rulemaking. 
 Under Mayor Bloomberg, New York City became the center of a very 
public but ultimately failed attempt to nudge consumers toward smaller 
size sodas. In June 2012, the city’s Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene proposed a Portion Cap rule, which would preclude restaurants 
from serving sugary drinks in cups larger than 16 fl uid ounces. 60 After 
holding public hearings, the Health Department fi nalized the Portion Cap 
rule in September 2012 to go into effect in March of the next year. The 
rule was part of Mayor Bloomberg’s broader strategy to combat obesity; 
yet it attracted the most attention. 61 
 In justifying the rule, the Department pointed to behavioral studies, 
which showed that people tend to overeat when given large size por-
tions. 62 Thus, the Department assumed that given the smaller size sodas 
New Yorkers would drink less soda. Though consumers could relatively 
easily go around the ban by purchasing two cups of soda, the Department 
predicted that the default option would be sticky enough that most con-
sumers would not opt out of the Portion Cap rule. 
 While the rule had many supporters, especially among consumer groups 
and nutrition experts, it generated vocal opposition from food vendors and 
business groups. The opposition led business groups to successfully contest 
the rule in court. 63 In addition, the rule generated a nationwide public back-
lash as Mayor Bloomberg’s administration was derided as a nanny-state. 64 
The backlash itself may be an example of behavioral bias. 65 Studies show 
that people react negatively to rules or actions that restrict or eliminate their 
choices. While many regulations generate opposition from some interest 
groups, the degree of public anger at the rule was perhaps unexpected. 
 There are several areas of uncertainty that could impact the rule’s effec-
tiveness. First, there was uncertainty about the very evidence that the 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 175
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

department was relying on to design its nudge. As the rule was proposed, 
the authors of one the referenced studies, Brian Wansink and David Just, 
wrote in the  Atlantic that their work was misinterpreted and misused. 66 
They pointed out that in their study consumers overate because they were 
unaware of the actual amount of food they were served. In their experi-
ments, the soup cups were continuously refi lled through a tube at the bot-
tom of the cup unbeknownst to subjects. In contrast, consumers buying 
large size sodas know exactly how much soda they drink. On the other 
hand, there were other studies that linked portion size to consumption, 
which seemed to support the city’s efforts. 67 
 Second, there was uncertainty about the potential unintended effects. 
In some studies, people who used smaller size plates in a cafeteria made 
more trips to the buffet, thereby negating the impacts of the nudge. 68 
In other studies, consumers making a “healthy” purchase would often 
combine it with an unhealthy snack. 69 They would feel that by buying a 
healthy food, they “earned” the right to indulge themselves with a tastier 
but high-calorie snack. Both biases could be active in the case of the large 
soda ban, which could potentially diminish the nudge’s impact. 
 Ultimately, the courts struck down the rule before it took effect, fi nd-
ing that the Health Department had exceeded the authority delegated to 
it by the legislature. 70 Thus, it is unclear whether it would have had the 
intended effect. Some studies suggest that it may have backfi red. 71 
 Legal concerns and uncertainties are not unique to government actions; 
private innovations can face similar concerns. Yet, the rule’s failure did not 
result from the substance of the action itself—had it been a voluntary 
 private initiative to limit large sodas it would have raised few objections. It 
was the Health Department’s failure to secure proper statutory authoriza-
tion that led the court to invalidate the rule. 
 This points to a considerable limitation on the part of regulatory agen-
cies in designing nudges. They can only nudge consumers in areas where 
they have explicit delegated authority to regulate. Regulators may have 
to resort to less-effective nudges simply because designing better nudges 
would require rulemaking powers that they currently do not have. In con-
trast, private fi rms do not face such rigid procedural requirements and 
have greater fl exibility to experiment with different nudge designs. 
 Beyond regulations, government-produced behavior change policies 
often come in the form of taxes such as the tax on sugar-sweetened soda 
beverages in Berkeley, California. 72 Similar to the FDA’s vending machine 
regulation, Berkeley’s tax targeted sodas, which public health offi cials see 
176 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

as one of the leading causes of obesity in youth. But despite similar end 
goals, the measure followed a very different process. 
 Part of the rationale for the tax was based on the traditional economic 
model—increasing the price in order to reduce consumption. Yet, advo-
cates of the soda tax had behavioral mechanisms in mind when they sought 
to use the tax to increase the salience of drink choice to consumers. 73 They 
hoped that the tax itself and the publicity that surrounded it would trigger 
consumers to think about their health goals and to choose healthier drinks. 
 In addition, tax proponents argued that attaching higher costs to 
unhealthy choices at the time of purchase would help undercut consum-
ers’ myopia. One of the reasons why sticking with healthy diets is so dif-
fi cult is that the benefi ts of choosing a sugar-packed highly caloric beverage 
are immediate, while the costs of the resulting obesity emerge much later. 
Present-biased consumers heavily discount future costs and therefore decide 
that the immediate benefi ts of enjoying a soda outweigh the future health 
costs. A soda tax would help offset consumers’ myopia by countering the 
immediate benefi ts of drinking soda with the immediate costs of the tax. 
 While tax proponents and many news outlets described the measure as 
a sales tax, the description is not accurate. California’s constitution explic-
itly prohibits local governments from imposing sales taxes on food in addi-
tion to those already in the state law. 74 So while soda beverages are already 
taxed under the current state law among other products, Berkeley could 
not impose an additional tax on sugary drinks. Instead, Berkeley had to 
resort to indirect measures like taxing soda distributors. 75 In November 
2014, citizens of Berkeley overwhelmingly approved the soda tax with 
over 76 % voting in favor. 76 
 As with New York’s Portion Cap rule, there is a considerable uncer-
tainty with the underlying empirical evidence. The goal of the soda tax is 
to give consumers an additional incentive to choose healthier drinks. As 
Berkeley Councilmember Susan Wengraf put it “I don’t want it to just 
be making people pay more for the poison, I want people to stop buying 
the poison.” 77 But the obese already have incentives to choose a healthier 
diet as they face substantial medical and fi nancial costs. 78 Their inability to 
make a rational healthy choice is the very reason for the public interven-
tion. The very biases that lead consumers to overeat in the fi rst place could 
similarly impact their reactions to soda taxes. 
 Empirical evidence on the health impact of sugar or similar fat taxes is 
mixed. 79 A preliminary survey indicates that Mexico’s soda tax imposed in 
2014 has led to some decreases in soda consumption. 80 However, in a fi eld 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 177
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

study, a soda tax led to an initial drop in consumption followed by a return 
to the original consumption levels. 81 Unexpectedly, the tax also led some 
consumers to switch to beer. 
 Another level of uncertainty relates to the implementation of the tax. 
Berkeley imposed the tax on the distributors of sugary drinks in the hope 
that the distributors would in turn pass the tax onto consumers. At the 
time, there was some debate on whether the distributors would actually 
pass the additional costs onto consumers. 82 It was equally plausible that 
they would choose to absorb the tax or increase prices across the board on 
all distributed items. 
 In addition, the soda tax sought to exclude small businesses from com-
pliance. Thus, the soda tax would be levied only on soda distribution to 
stores that have more than $100,000 in annual revenues. 83 Similar to the 
FDA’s vending machine regulation, Berkeley’s decision to limit the tax’s 
applicability was driven primarily by the political logic of taxation policy 
rather than consumers’ interests. 
 The point here is not to argue for or against taxes as tools of behavior 
change; rather, it is to point out that numerous restrictions on taxation and 
the way taxation power is divided between different levels of government 
can prevent some jurisdictions from effectively crafting the policies that 
they want to produce. In addition, the use of taxes for behavioral change 
rarely comes with plans for retrospective analysis of their  effectiveness. 
Thus, if Berkeley’s soda tax fails to achieve its stated goals, it would require 
political action to revise or if necessary repeal the tax. 
 MARKET NUDGES 
 Unlike the regulatory process, where every step is clearly prescribed 
through congressional statutes, presidential executive orders, or federal 
court cases, new product development in the private sector does not have 
to follow any specifi c process. The process varies widely from one com-
pany to the next, making it impossible to compare the regulatory process 
to a specifi c private product development process. 
 However, most companies follow an interactive model of innovation 
for new product development; the linear process is used in limited cases. 84 
Private fi rms deal with this uncertainty through trial and error. They nor-
mally try their ideas out with focus groups, beta testing, A/B testing, 
and other techniques that allow them to weed out good and bad ideas. 85 
Even after releasing a product, fi rms continue to monitor the product’s 
178 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 performance in the real-world setting and feed this information back to 
designers in order to fi x the newly discovered issues or to improve the 
product based on consumer feedback. 
 An example of testing and experimenting with new ideas prior to imple-
mentation comes from Jawbone, a maker of fi tness tracking wristbands. 
The company had an idea that it could nudge its customers to exercise 
more during Thanksgiving. 86 To do so, they sent 5 % of their customers 
a challenge to take more steps during the holiday season. Customers who 
accepted the challenge ended up taking an additional 1500 steps. Thus, 
Jawbone used the commitment principle, a common nudging technique, 
to help customers fi ght back against the extra pounds most people put on 
during Thanksgiving. At the same time, when it tested different wording 
for the challenge, the company found that it had no impact on the out-
comes. The outcome of these tests was a new feature added to the product 
that helped customers stay on top of their exercise goals. Importantly, the 
company tested its idea for the new feature and experimented with differ-
ent variations of the concept prior to rolling it out to all consumers. 
 In a different example, Opower modifi ed its nudges in response to con-
sumer feedback after market release. In addition to comparing a utility 
customer’s energy use to his or her neighbors, Opower’s Home Energy 
Report originally included an injunctive message—a smiley or a frowny 
face depending on whether the customer’s consumption was above or 
below average. 87 Guided by a well-known study, Opower included the 
injunctive message to avoid a boomerang effect, where more effi cient cus-
tomers would view the report as an excuse to increase energy consump-
tion. 88 However, after rollout, Opower received too many complaints from 
customers who received a frowny face. 89 Customers were incensed that a 
utility company would pass judgment on them. Consequently, Opower 
dropped the frowny face and now uses the absence of smiley face as a sign 
of disapproval for wasteful customers. 
 In addition to differences in the production process, there are two key 
elements that make market nudges more effective than regulatory ones: 
customization and competition. 
 Customization 
 A prominent behavioral scientist Sendhil Mullainathan identifi es scalability 
as a major problem in designing effective nudges. 90 He notes that evi-
dence for many nudges typically comes from small-scale research projects 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 179
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

conducted in lab settings whose main goal is to test if and how behavioral 
biases impact subjects’ behavior in a specifi ed context. These fi ndings may 
not hold up when applied on a large scale in real-world settings. Thus, 
they need to be tested and if necessary redesigned to ensure scalability. 
 Steve Wendel in this volume echoes Mullainathan’s concern. In his 
work on behavioral technologies, Wendel found that population charac-
teristics may impact the effectiveness of some nudges. Thus, nudges that 
change behavior of some test populations may have no impact on others. 
Consequently, testing nudges on different populations is crucial to ensure 
their effectiveness. 
 For regulatory nudges, this presents a problem. Since regulations 
apply to the entire population, implementing nudges that work only for 
some segment of a population entails unnecessary expenditure—many 
individuals would be exposed to nudges that do not impact their behav-
ior. Furthermore, if different nudges work for different people, then to 
achieve a broad behavior change under the rulemaking process the regu-
lators would have to impose all nudges on all people. The rulemaking 
process’ inability to target specifi c populations leads to a considerable 
waste of resources. 
 In contrast, private companies have the ability to customize their 
nudges and target only the populations amenable to specifi c nudges. 
Consider Express Scripts, a pharmacy benefi t management company that 
helps health insurance companies improve medication adherence of their 
patients. 91 Poor medication adherence is a major problem in health care. 92 
Many chronic patients undergoing a lengthy course of medication, often 
lasting more than a year, fail to complete the treatment. This failure to 
complete the course often results in higher hospitalization rates and more 
expensive treatment at a later time, with estimated annual costs ranging 
between $100 billion and $300 billion. 93 Consequently, any measures that 
would nudge patients to take their medication could prevent future health 
problems for the patients and save health insurance companies from pay-
ing for more expensive treatment. 
 The problem with addressing poor medication adherence is that 
patients stop taking medication for different reasons. 94 Some may not 
fully understand the need to take medication due to low medical literacy 
levels. Thus, a helpful nudge would be to explain the treatment in simple 
accessible terms to the patients or their family members. Others may have 
fi nancial concerns over the cost of medication, which can be addressed 
through lower copayments. Some patients may simply forget or have 
180 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

other  behavioral reasons for not taking medications. In this case, timely 
reminders, calendarized packaging, or monitoring systems may be helpful. 
 In response to this demand, Express Scripts created a data analytics tool 
ScreenRX, which uses over 300 variables in order to identify patients at most 
risk for nonadherence. 95 This allows health insurers to focus only on patients 
that need intervention and not waste their nudges on patients that are likely to 
take the medication anyway. In addition, ScreenRX identifi es the likely causes 
for nonadherence, which allows health insurers to tailor their interventions to 
the patient’s needs and increase the effectiveness of each intervention. 
 In a similar example, Opower uses data analytics to identify the major 
causes for excessive energy consumption and provide tailored energy- 
saving recommendations to each customer. 96 Thus, if a customer’s energy 
usage patterns point to an ineffi cient clothes dryer as a major energy hog, 
Opower’s Home Energy Report would include a recommendation to 
upgrade the clothes dryer to a more effi cient model. 
 By targeting and tailoring their nudges, private companies reduce the 
overall costs of nudging. First, they only nudge consumers that actually 
need to be nudged; they do not waste nudges on consumers who make 
better choices on their own. Second, companies improve the effectiveness 
of their nudges by identifying the underlying cause of biased behavior and 
using the nudges that specifi cally address the identifi ed cause. They avoid 
imposing nudges that would not work for a particular consumer. 
 Competition 
 Another advantage of market nudges is that typically there are compet-
ing fi rms working on similar nudges. Thus, market competition offers a 
way to test multiple version of the same nudge. The failure of any single 
company’s process to produce an effective nudge does not doom the pros-
pects of that nudge becoming available to consumers. Given the parallel 
experimentation by multiple companies, there is a greater chance that at 
least one of them will be successful and will produce an effective nudge. 
 For example, two personal fi nance software companies,  Mint.com and 
Wesabe, competed to help consumers organize their personal fi nances 
and to work toward specifi c fi nancial goals, for example, reduce spend-
ing or pay off debts. 97 As they developed their products, they both faced 
a choice: import customers’ banking data automatically or ask customers 
to do it manually. Automatic import obviously offered a more convenient 
service to customers, but it came at a cost. To import data automatically, 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 181
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

the company would have to contract with a third party, a company called 
Yodlee, which had the software capable of extracting necessary data from 
banking statements. However, at the time, Yodlee was experiencing fi nan-
cial and managerial diffi culties and faced a risk of going under. 
 The two companies made different choices. Wesabe chose not to expose 
itself to Yodlee’s risks; it judged that manual import would not pose a sub-
stantial burden on consumers. In contrast,  Mint.com decided that offer-
ing the convenience of automatic import was worth the risk, so it paired 
up with Yodlee. In the end,  Mint.com won over most of the customers, 
while Wesabe was forced to close down. 
 Note that both companies had good reasons for the different deci-
sions they made and there was no way to know beforehand which decision 
would be better. It was market competition that allowed for both options 
to be tested and the better one to be chosen. 
 Another example of market competition is in medication adherence 
nudges. In addition to Express Scripts, FICO and RxAnte have devel-
oped their own data analytics tools to identify at-risk patients. 98 On the 
intervention side, a number of companies are experimenting with dif-
ferent designs for pill bottles that would track patients and nudge them 
to take the pill if they are missing a dose. For example, Vitality makes 
bottles that begin to glow and emit sounds if patients miss a dose. 99 It 
tracks whether the patient opened the bottle to identify missed doses. 
In contrast, AdhereTech’s bottles track the actual contents and are even 
smart enough to track liquid medications, whereas Proteus Digital Health 
attached sensors to pills themselves to track when pills are actually taken. 
 Since the fi eld of medication adherence is still in its infancy, it is too early 
to tell which of these behavioral technologies will be successful. However, 
the fact that companies are experimenting with a wide variety of technolo-
gies increases the chances that some of these pursuits will prove fruitful. 
Since health insurance companies are paying for interventions, they have 
strong incentives to increase their effectiveness and reduce their costs. 
 WHY REGULATORY NUDGES FAIL 
 Regulatory nudges fail because their proponents attempt to use a legisla-
tive process to develop consumer products. Regulations are laws and rule-
making is essentially a legislative process. One would expect the process 
that lays out the rules of the game to require considerable deliberation 
and buy in from stakeholders as well as a certain degree of permanence. 
182 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

For example, our views on the harm of companies making false claims to 
consumers are unlikely to change considerably over time. It would make 
sense to address such issues through the conservative rulemaking process. 
 Where regulations fail is on issues that require constant innovation. 
Given behavioral economics’ relatively young age and the rapid pace 
of change in our understanding of its implications on human decision- 
making, the process of producing nudges must be nimble and fl exible 
enough to respond and incorporate those changes. In addition, it must be 
able to deal with a high degree of uncertainty and limited knowledge. The 
rigid linear rulemaking process is simply not suited for the task of produc-
ing and constantly improving nudges. 
 Ultimately, the private sector is better equipped to produce effective 
nudges that would help consumers overcome their biases and improve 
their well-being. Private companies are better able to harness the power of 
big data to customize and target nudges to specifi c subpopulations or even 
individuals. In addition, market competition allows for parallel experimen-
tation with variations of similar nudges, increasing the chances that an 
effective nudge would be discovered. 
 Regulators’ attempts to complement the private sector’s efforts, as 
suggested by Sunstein, are unlikely to be successful. While the utility of 
nudges is not in question, the government’s resources may be better spent 
supporting private sector efforts rather than competing with them. 
 NOTES 
 1. Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions 
About Health ,  Wealth ,  and Happiness (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2008). 
 2. Cass R. Sunstein,  Why Nudge ? (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2014). 
 3. See e.g. Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, “Libertarian 
Paternalism Is Not an Oxymoron,”  The University of Chicago Law 
Review 70(4) (October 1, 2003): 1159–1202; Cass R. Sunstein, 
 Simpler :  The Future of Government (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
2013); Sunstein,  Why Nudge ? 
 4. Oliver Burkeman, “How Bloomberg’s Soda Ban Is a Classic Example 
of ‘Choice Architecture,’”  The Guardian , July 10, 2012,  http://
www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/oliver-burkemans-
blog/2012/jul/10/bloomberg-soda-ban-new-york-freedom 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 183
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 5. Richard H. Thaler, “To State the Obvious: A BAN Is Not a NUDGE. 
The Opposite in Fact. So Don’t Blame Bloomberg’s Ban on Large 
Soda Cups on Us.,” Twitter, @ R _ Thaler , May 31, 2012,  https://
twitter.com/R_Thaler/status/208273339507150849 
 6. See e.g. Robert B. Cialdini,  Infl uence :  The Psychology of Persuasion , 
Revised edition (New York: Harper Business, 2006). 
 7. Hunt Allcott, “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,”  Journal of 
Public Economics , Special Issue: The Role of Firms in Tax Systems 
95(9–10) (October 2011): 1082–1095. 
 8. Arundhati Parmar, “Start-up Developing Smart Pill Bottle Targets 
HIV, Cancer, Transplant Meds & Speciality Pharmacies,”  MedCity 
News , January 2, 2013,  http://medcitynews.com/2013/01/
start-up-developing-smart-pill-bottle-targets-hiv-cancer-transplant-
drugs-and-speciality-pharmacies/ 
 9. For a more detailed discussion on company incentives see the chapter 
by Jody Beggs in this volume. 
 10. Sunstein,  Why Nudge ?, 113–114. 
 11. Gloria Barczak, Abbie Griffi n, and Kenneth B. Kahn, “Trends and 
Drivers of Success in NPD Practices: Results of the 2003 PDMA Best 
Practices Study,”  Journal of Product Innovation Management 26(1) 
(January 1, 2009): 6. 
 12. George Castellion and Stephen K. Markham, “New Product Failure 
Rates: Infl uence of Argumentum Ad Populum and Self-Interest,” 
 Journal of Product Innovation Management 30(5) (September 1, 
2013): 976–979. 
 13. Stephen J. Kline and Nathan Rosenberg, “An Overview of 
Innovation,” in  The Positive Sum Strategy :  Harnessing Technology for 
Economic Growth , ed. Ralph Landau and Nathan Rosenberg, 1986, 
275–305. 
 14. See Dora Marinova and John Phillimore, “Models of Innovation,” in 
 The International Handbook on Innovation , ed. Larisa V. Shavinina, 
2003, 44–53; Kline and Rosenberg, “An Overview of Innovation”; 
Roy Rothwell, “Towards the Fifth-generation Innovation Process,” 
 International Marketing Review 11(1) (February 1994): 7–31. 
 15. Eric von Hippel,  The Sources of Innovation (Oxford University Press, 
1988). 
 16. Eric von Hippel,  Democratizing Innovation (MIT Press, 2006). 
 17. Kline and Rosenberg, “An Overview of Innovation.” 
184 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 18. Stefan Thomke, Eric von Hippel, and Roland Franke, “Modes of 
Experimentation: An Innovation Process – and Competitive – 
Variable,”  Research Policy 27(3) (July 1998): 315–332. 
 19. Margherita Balconi, Stefano Brusoni, and Luigi Orsenigo, “In 
Defence of the Linear Model: An Essay,”  Research Policy 39(1) 
(February 2010): 1–13. 
 20. James Maxwell and Forrest Briscoe, “There’s Money in the Air: The 
CFC Ban and DuPont’s Regulatory Strategy,”  Business Strategy and 
the Environment 6(5) (November 1, 1997): 276–286. 
 21. DuPont, “Backgrounder: DuPont and the CFC/Ozone Depletion 
Issue,”  DuPont , February 9, 2007,  http://www2.dupont.com/
Media_Center/en_US/assets/downloads/pdf/Backgrounder_
CFCs.pdf 
 22. Betsy D. Gelb and Gabriel M. Gelb, “New Coke’s Fizzle: Lessons for 
the Rest of Us,”  Sloan Management Review 28(1) (Fall 1986): 71–77. 
 23. David K. Levine,  Is Behavioral Economics Doomed ?  The Ordinary ver-
sus the Extraordinary (Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers, 
2012). 
 24. Tim Harford, “Nudge or Fudge?,”  Financial Times , March 22, 2014, 
sec. Life&Arts. 
 25. Department of Energy, “Energy Conservation Program: Energy 
Conservation Standards for General Service Fluorescent Lamps and 
Incandescent Refl ector Lamps,”  Federal Register 74(69) (April 13, 
2009): 16920–17027; e.g. Department of Energy, “Energy 
Conservation Program: Energy Conservation Standards for Certain 
Consumer Products (Dishwashers, Dehumidifi ers, Microwave Ovens, 
and Electric and Gas Kitchen Ranges and Ovens) and for Certain 
Commercial and Industrial Equipment (Commercial Clothes Washers),” 
 Federal Register 74(215) (November 9, 2009): 57738–57802. 
 26. Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Transportation, 
“Proposed Rulemaking to Establish Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse 
Gas Emission Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy 
Standards,”  Federal Register 74(186) (September 28, 2009): 49454–
49789; Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
Transportation, “Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards and Fuel 
Effi ciency Standards for Medium- and Heavy-Duty Engines and 
Vehicles,”  Federal Register 75(229) (November 30, 2010): 
74152–74456. 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 185
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 27. Adam B. Jaffe and Robert N. Stavins, “The Energy Paradox and the 
Diffusion of Conservation Technology,”  Resource and Energy 
Economics 16(2) (May 1994): 91–122; Eric Hirst and Marilyn Brown, 
“Closing the Effi ciency Gap: Barriers to the Effi cient Use of Energy,” 
 Resources ,  Conservation and Recycling 3(4) (June 1990): 267–281. 
 28. Hunt Allcott and Michael Greenstone,  Is There an Energy Effi ciency 
Gap ?, NBER Working Paper 17766 (Cambridge, MA, January 2012), 
Cambridge, MA,  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17766 
 29. Hippel,  Democratizing Innovation , 66–70. 
 30. Glenn W. Harrison and E. Elisabet Rutström, “Experimental Evidence 
on the Existence of Hypothetical Bias in Value Elicitation Methods,” 
in  Handbook of Experimental Economics Results , ed. Charles R. Plott 
and Vernon L. Smith, Volume 1 (New York: North Holland, 2008), 
752–767, 
 http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1574072207000819 
 31. Steven D. Levitt and John A. List, “What Do Laboratory Experiments 
Measuring Social Preferences Reveal About the Real World?,”  Journal 
of Economic Perspectives 21(2) (2007): 153–174. 
 32. E.g. priming, anchoring, and information bias. See Daniel Kahneman, 
 Thinking ,  Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2013). 
 33. Hippel,  Democratizing Innovation , 68–69. 
 34. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge . 
 35. Richard H. Thaler and Shlomo Benartzi, “Save More Tomorrow TM : 
Using Behavioral Economics to Increase Employee Saving,”  Journal 
of Political Economy 112(S1) (February 1, 2004): S164–S187. 
 36. Erin Todd Bronchetti et al.  When a Nudge Isn ’ t Enough :  Defaults and 
Saving Among Low-Income Tax Filers , NBER Working Paper 16887 
(Cambridge, MA, March 2011), Cambridge, MA,  http://www.nber.
org/papers/w16887 
 37. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Electronic Fund 
Transfers,”  Federal Register 74(220) (November 17, 2009): 
59033–59056. 
 38. Lauren E. Willis, “When Nudges Fail: Slippery Defaults,”  University 
of Chicago Law Review 80(3) (2013): 1185. 
 39. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Electronic Fund 
Transfers,” 59047. 
 40. Pew Center on the States,  Overdraft America :  Confusion and Concerns 
About Bank Practices (Washington, DC, n.d.), 4, Washington, DC, 
186 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_
assets/2012/SCIBOverdraft20America1pdf.pdf 
 41. Ibid., 5. 
 42. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,  CFPB Study of Overdraft 
Programs :  A White Paper of Initial Findings (Washington, DC, June 
2013), 30–31, Washington, DC,  http://fi les.consumerfi nance.
gov/f/201306_cfpb_whitepaper_overdraft-practices.pdf 
 43. Willis, “When Nudges Fail,” 1189. 
 44. Willis, “When Nudges Fail.” 
 45. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Electronic Fund 
Transfers.” 
 46. Susan E Dudley and Jerry Brito,  Regulation :  A Primer (Arlington: 
Mercatus Center at George Mason University, 2012). 
 47. Marissa Martino Golden, “Interest Groups in the Rule-Making 
Process: Who Participates? Whose Voices Get Heard?,”  Journal of 
Public Administration Research and Theory 8(2) (1998): 245–270; 
Jason Webb Yackee and Susan Webb Yackee, “A Bias Towards 
Business? Assessing Interest Group Infl uence on the U.S. Bureaucracy,” 
 Journal of Politics 68(1) (2006): 128–139. 
 48. Morton Rosenberg,  Congressional Review of Agency Rulemaking :  An 
Update and Assessment of the Congressional Review Act after a Decade , 
CRS Reports (Washington, DC, May 8, 2008), Washington, DC. 
 49. Food and Drug Administration, “Food Labeling; Calorie Labeling of 
Articles of Food in Vending Machines,”  Federal Register 76(66) 
(April 6, 2011): 19238–19255. 
 50.  Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ,  Pub. L. No 111-148 ,  124 
Stat. 119 , 2010, sec. 4205. 
 51. Food and Drug Administration, “Calorie Labeling of Articles of Food 
in Vending Machines,” 19245–19246. 
 52. Food and Drug Administration, “Food Labeling; Calorie Labeling of 
Articles of Food in Vending Machines,”  Federal Register 79(230) 
(December 1, 2014): 71259–71293. 
 53. Ibid., 71261 (see comment 2 and FDA’s response). 
 54. See e.g. David Epstein and Sharyn O’Halloran,  Delegating Powers :  A 
Transaction Cost Politics Approach to Policy Making Under Separate 
Powers , First Edition (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999); 
John D. Huber and Charles Shipan, “Politics, Delegation, and 
Bureaucracy,” in  The Oxford Handbook of Political Economy , ed. Barry 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 187
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

R. Weingast and Donald A. Wittman (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2008), 256–272. 
 55. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Electronic Fund 
Transfers,” 59034–59035. 
 56. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,  CFPB Consumer Laws and 
Regulations :  Electronic Fund Transfer Act (Washington, DC, October 
2013), 
Washington, 
DC, 
 http://fi les.consumerfi nance.
gov/f/201310_cfpb_updated-regulation-e-examination-proce-
dures_including-remittances.pdf 
 57. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,  CFPB Study of Overdraft 
Programs ; Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,  Data Point : 
 Checking Account Overdraft (Washington, DC, July 2014), 
Washington, 
DC, 
 http://fi les.consumerfi nance.gov/f/201407_
cfpb_report_data-point_overdrafts.pdf 
 58.  Revised Model State Administrative Procedure Act , 2010,  http://
www.uniformlaws.org/shared/docs/state%20administrative%20pro-
cedure/msapa_fi nal_10.pdf 
 59.  New York City Administrative Procedure Act. NYC Charter ch. 45 , 
2004, 
 http://www.nyc.gov/html/records/pdf/section%201133_
citycharter.pdf 
 60. Department of Health and Mental Hygiene,  Notice of Adoption of an 
Amendment ( §81.53 )  to Article 81 of the New York City Health Code 
(New York, NY, September 13, 2012), New York, NY,  http://www.
nyc.gov/html/doh/downloads/pdf/notice/2012/notice-adop-
tion-amend-article81.pdf 
 61. The New York City Obesity Task Force,  Reversing the Epidemic :  The 
New York City Obesity Task Force Plan to Prevent and Control Obesity 
(New York, NY, May 31, 2012), New York, NY,  http://www.nyc.
gov/html/om/pdf/2012/otf_report.pdf 
 62. Department of Health and Mental Hygiene,  Notice of Adoption . 
 63.  N.Y. Statewide Coalition of Hispanic Chambers of Commerce v. N.Y.C. 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene , 23 n.y.3d 681 (New York 
State, Court of Appeals 2014). 
 64. Karen Harned, “The Michael Bloomberg Nanny State In New York: 
A Cautionary Tale,”  Forbes, May 10, 2013,  http://www.forbes.com/
sites/realspin/2013/05/10/the-michael-bloomberg-nanny-state-
in-new-york-a-cautionary-tale/ 
 65. Melissa Healy, “Proposed Soda Ban Likely to Backfi re, Study Finds,” 
 Los Angeles Times , April 11, 2013,  http://articles.latimes.com/2013/
apr/11/science/la-sci-small-sodas-20130411 
188 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 66. Brian Wansink and David Just, “How Bloomberg’s Soft Drink Ban 
Will Backfi re on NYC Public Health,”  The Atlantic , June 14, 2012, 
 http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2012/06/
how-bloombergs-soft-drink-ban-will-backfire-on-nyc-public-
health/258501/ 
 67. e.g. Julie E. Flood, Liane S. Roe, and Barbara J. Rolls, “The Effect of 
Increased Beverage Portion Size on Energy Intake at a Meal,”  Journal 
of the American Dietetic Association 106(12) (December 2006): 
1984–1990 (cited in the Notice of Adoption). 
 68. Barbara J. Rolls et al. “Using a Smaller Plate Did Not Reduce Energy 
Intake at Meals,”  Appetite 49(3) (November 2007): 652–660. 
 69. Keith Wilcox et al. “Vicarious Goal Fulfi llment: When the Mere 
Presence of a Healthy Option Leads to an Ironically Indulgent 
Decision,”  Journal of Consumer Research 36(3) (October 1, 2009): 
380–393. 
 70.  N.Y. Statewide Coalition of Hispanic Chambers of Commerce v. N.Y.C. 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene , 23 n.y.3d.: 
 71. Brent M. Wilson, Stephanie Stolarz-Fantino, and Edmund Fantino, 
“Regulating the Way to Obesity: Unintended Consequences of 
Limiting Sugary Drink Sizes,”  PloS One 8(4) (2013): e61081. 
 72. City of Berkeley, “Measure D – Impose a General Tax on Distributors 
of Sugar-Sweetened Beverages,”  Election Information :  2014 Ballot 
Measures , September 2, 2014,  http://www.cityofberkeley.info/
Clerk/Elections/Election__2014_Ballot_Measure_Page.aspx 
 73. Maddie Oatman, “Soda: Ban It? Nah. Tax It? Yep,”  Mother Jones , 
June 18, 2012,  http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2012/
06/soda-sugar-tax-richmond 
 74. California Constitution, article XIII, sec. 34. 
 75. Public Health Law & Policy,  Local Taxes on Sugar-Sweetened Beverages 
in California :  Legal Considerations and Procedural Requirements . 
 76. Alameda County Registrar of Voters, “General Election – Unoffi cial 
– November 04, 2014,”  Alameda County Registrar of Voters , 
November 12, 2014,  http://www.acgov.org/rov/current_elec-
tion/226/index.htm 
 77. Berkeleyside, “Will Berkeley Be First in Nation to Impose Soda Tax?,” 
 Berkeleyside , February 12, 2014,  http://www.berkeleyside.com/2014/
02/12/will-berkeley-be-fi rst-in-nation-to-impose-sugar-tax/ 
 78. Michael L. Marlow and Sherzod Abdukadirov, “Can Behavioral 
Economics Combat Obesity?,”  Regulation 35(2) (July 9, 2012); see 
also Marlow’s chapter in this volume. 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 189
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 79. Oliver Mytton, Dushy Clarke, and Mike Rayner, “Taxing Unhealthy 
Food and Drinks to Improve Health,”  BMJ 344 (May 15, 2012): 
e2931. 
 80. Amy Guthrie, “Survey Shows Mexicans Drinking Less Soda After 
Tax,”  Wall Street Journal , October 13, 2014, sec. Business,  http://
www.wsj.com/articles/survey-shows-mexicans-drinking-less-
soda-after-tax-1413226009 
 81. Brian Wansink et al.  From Coke to Coors :  A Field Study of a Fat Tax 
and Its Unintended Consequences , SSRN Scholarly Paper (Rochester, 
NY, July 29, 2014), Rochester, NY,  http://papers.ssrn.com/
abstract=2473623 
 82. Jennifer Brockett and Loring Rose, “Berkeley’s Measure D: What 
Distributors, Restaurants and Retailers Need to Know about the 
Berkeley ‘Sugar Tax,’”  Hospitality Law Blog , November 21, 2014, 
 http://www.dwthospitalitylaw.com/2014/11/articles/food-
beverage/berkeleys-measure-d-what-distributors-restaurants-
and-retailers-need-to-know-about-the-berkeley-sugar-tax/ 
 83. City of Berkeley, “Measure D.” 
 84. Kline and Rosenberg, “An Overview of Innovation.” 
 85. See Wendel’s chapter in this volume. 
 86. Parmy Olson, “The Guinea Pig Economy: A Massive Social 
Experiment on You Is Under Way, and You Will Love It,”  Forbes , 
February 9, 2015. 
 87. Mark Joseph Stern, “A Little Guilt, a Lot of Energy Savings,”  Slate , 
March 1, 2013,  http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/the_
effi cient_planet/2013/03/opower_using_smiley_faces_and_peer_
pressure_to_save_the_planet.html 
 88. See P. Wesley Schultz et al. “The Constructive, Destructive, and 
Reconstructive Power of Social Norms,”  Psychological Science 18(5) 
(May 1, 2007): 429–434. 
 89. Stern, “A Little Guilt, a Lot of Energy Savings.” 
 90. Hunt Allcott and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Behavior and Energy 
Policy,”  Science 327(5970) (March 5, 2010): 1204–1205; Saugato 
Datta and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Behavioral Design: A New 
Approach to Development Policy,”  Review of Income and Wealth 
60(1) (2014): 7–35. 
 91. Express Scripts, “Healthier Outcomes Require Better Decisions,” 
 Express Scripts Lab , 2013,  http://lab.express-scripts.com/insights/
adherence/infographic-predicting-rx-nonadherence 
190 
S. ABDUKADIROV
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 92. Hayden B. Bosworth et al. “Medication Adherence: A Call for 
Action,”  American Heart Journal 162(3) (September 1, 2011): 
412–424. 
 93. Meera Viswanathan et al. “Interventions to Improve Adherence to 
Self-Administered Medications for Chronic Diseases in the United 
States: A Systematic Review,”  Annals of Internal Medicine 157(11) 
(December 4, 2012): 785–795. 
 94. Bosworth et al. “Medication Adherence.” 
 95. Express Scripts, “INFOGRAPHIC: Predicting Rx Nonadherence,” 
 Express Scripts Lab , April 23, 2013,  http://lab.express-scripts.com/
insights/adherence/infographic-predicting-rx-nonadherence 
 96. Allcott, “Social Norms and Energy Conservation.” 
 97. Victor Lombardi,  Why We Fail :  Learning from Experience Design 
Failures (Brooklyn: Rosenfeld Media, 2013), 73–86. 
 98. Deanna Pogorelc, “Can Data Analysis Predict Who Will Adhere to 
Medications, Which Interventions Would Help?,”  MedCity News , 
September 
28, 
2012, 
 http://medcitynews.com/2012/09/
can-data-analysis-predict-who-will-adhere-to-medications-which-
interventions-would-help/ 
 99. Parmar, “Start-up Developing Smart Pill Bottle Targets HIV, Cancer, 
Transplant Meds & Speciality Pharmacies.” 
WHO SHOULD NUDGE? 191
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 PART II 
 Case Studies 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

195
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_8
 Weight-Loss Nudges: Market Test 
or Government Guess? 
 Michael   Marlow 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Rising obesity in the USA has led public health experts to propose solu-
tions to what is frequently called an obesity epidemic. Obesity rates have 
doubled during the past three decades and, as of 2009, more than one- 
third of adults were obese. 1 A recent study predicts that, by 2030, 42 % 
of Americans will be obese and 11 % will be severely obese. 2 Obesity is a 
major health concern, given its association with chronic conditions that 
include diabetes, hypertension, high cholesterol, stroke, heart disease, cer-
tain cancers, and arthritis. 3 
 M.  Marlow () 
 California Polytechnic State University ,  San Luis Obispo ,  CA ,  USA 
 
 When self-control problems and mindless choosing are combined, the 
result is a series of bad outcomes for real people.… Nearly two-thirds of 
Americans are overweight or obese.… Together, these facts suggest that 
signifi cant numbers of people could benefi t from a nudge.
— Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein, 
 Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and Happiness . 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Many behavioral economists believe that undesired weight gain 
is the result of unconscious and irrational decisions that result from 
 psychological, social, cognitive, and emotional factors. In their book 
 Nudge :  Improving Decisions about Health ,  Wealth ,  and Happiness , Richard 
H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein espouse the behavioral economics view 
that well-designed nudges devised by “choice architects” can steer indi-
viduals toward wiser decisions that enhance their welfare. 4 They argue that 
the most important applications of nudge theory often lie with govern-
ments rather than markets, as the following statement makes clear: “The 
key point here is that for all their virtues, markets often give companies a 
strong incentive to cater to (and profi t from) human frailties, rather than 
try to eradicate them or to minimize their effects.” 5 
 This chapter examines the effectiveness of nudges designed to steer 
us toward better food and beverage consumption behaviors as a means 
of lowering population weight. It fi rst discusses our state of knowledge 
on obesity causes and prevention. Next, it presents the basics of nudge 
theory followed by criticisms of that theory. It then discusses various 
imperfections that all choice architects—whether in governments or mar-
kets—must face, which suggest that nudges are a blunt instrument for 
reducing population weight. Finally, the paper discusses how nudging by 
governments differs from nudging by markets, and concludes that market 
nudging is the more promising avenue for helping citizens lose weight. 
 THE STATE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE ON OBESITY CAUSES 
AND PREVENTION 
 Historical BMI data show that Americans started gaining weight in the 
1920s, but only in the 1980s did a large number of Americans begin 
crossing the body mass index (BMI) threshold of 30 that defi nes  obesity. 6 
To calculate BMI, individuals divide their weight by the square of their 
height, with values given in units of kg/m 2 . A six-foot-tall male, for exam-
ple, is obese if he weighs at least 221 pounds. 
 The timing of the “obesity epidemic” is sensitive to the measures of 
fatness used. 7 BMI, for instance, does not distinguish fat from lean mass, 
thus leading to greater misclassifi cation in men due to larger variation 
in muscularity. BMI misclassifi es substantial percentages of individuals as 
obese and nonobese when compared with more accurate measures such 
as percentage of body fat. 8 Measures using skinfold thickness indicate 
that obesity rates started rising 10–20 years earlier than the 1980s, thus 
196 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 suggesting that gradual infl uences on weight are more important than 
commonly thought. 
 Despite decades of research into the causes of the obesity epidemic, a clear 
understanding of obesity has proven elusive. 9 A short list of potential causes 
for rising obesity prevalence includes increased consumption of sugar-sweet-
ened beverages, 10 falling food prices, 11 urban sprawl, 12 increases in calories 
consumed away from home, 13 sedentary lifestyles fostered by technology, 14 
and agricultural policies that encourage production of unhealthy foods 15 . 
 Obstacles believed to impede a better understanding of the obesity epi-
demic include problems in defi ning obesity, lax application of scientifi c 
standards, tenuous assumption making, fl awed measurement, and lim-
ited examination of alternative explanations of cause. 16 A team of obesity 
researchers recently argued that, while energy intake and physical activity 
energy expenditure are key modifi able determinants of energy balance, 
self-reports of these measures are so poor that they are wholly unaccept-
able for scientifi c research on obesity. 17 A major concern is that past use 
of self-reported data for studies has led to misguided health care policies, 
research, and clinical judgment. 
 A recent study in the  New England Journal of Medicine argues that 
scientifi cally unsupported beliefs about obesity are pervasive in both the 
scientifi c literature and the popular press. 18 The authors identify myths, 
presumptions, and facts based on the current state of scientifi c knowledge. 
They consider propositions to be true only when supported by confi rma-
tory randomized studies. The following “myths,” “presumptions,” and 
“facts” are most relevant to the present paper. 
 The authors defi ne “myths” as beliefs that persist despite clear contra-
dicting evidence:
•  Small, sustained changes in energy intake or expenditure will pro-
duce large, long-term weight changes. 
•  Setting realistic goals in obesity treatment is important because oth-
erwise patients will become frustrated and lose less weight. 
•  Large, rapid weight loss is associated with poorer long-term weight 
outcomes than is slow, gradual weight loss. 
The authors defi ne “presumptions” as beliefs about obesity that persist in 
the absence of supporting scientifi c evidence:
•  Regularly eating (vs. skipping) breakfast protects against obesity. 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 197
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

•  Eating more fruits and vegetables will result in weight loss or less 
weight gain regardless of whether one intentionally makes any other 
behavioral or environmental changes. 
•  Snacking contributes to weight gain and obesity. 
“Facts” are beliefs consistent with the evidence:
•  Diets very effectively reduce weight, but trying to go on a diet or 
recommending that someone go on a diet generally does not work 
well in the long term. 
•  Exercise helps mitigate the health-damaging effects of obesity, even 
without weight loss. 
•  Physical activity in a suffi cient dose aids long-term weight 
maintenance. 
•  Involving parents promotes greater weight loss or maintenance in 
overweight children. 
•  Provision of meals by an outside source and use of meal-replacement 
products promote greater weight loss. 
 A recent study fi nding no support for the common belief that eating 
more fruits and vegetables promotes weight loss is consistent with the 
view that many popular myths persist regarding obesity. 19 Such recom-
mendations are included in the Department of Agriculture’s “Choose My 
Plate,” for example. 20 Fruit and vegetable consumption has demonstrable 
health benefi ts, but apparently weight loss is not one of them as long as 
individuals do not also reduce intake of other foods. 
 The current state of knowledge is thus far from complete. Researchers 
have yet to reach consensus on what causes for excessive weight gain are 
most important in explaining our rising obesity rates. Unfortunately, there 
are also relatively few facts about how to successfully lose weight, and the 
evidence does not fully support many widely held beliefs. 
 THE OBESE MAY UNDERSTAND THE HEALTH 
AND ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF THEIR CHOICES 
 A critical assumption of nudge theory is that individuals are acting out of 
sync with their long-term interests. The obese, for example, often want 
to lose weight, but nonetheless frequently fail in their weight-reduction 
efforts. The evidence, however, on whether the obese are truly misin-
formed or simply irrational is less than complete. 
198 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 One study of 1130 adults examined whether overweight and obese indi-
viduals believed they were at greater risk of obesity-related diseases and 
premature mortality. 21 Obese and overweight adults forecasted life expec-
tancies that were 3.9 and 2.4 years, respectively, shorter than those of nor-
mal-weight adults. Excess weight was associated with greater self- perceived 
risk of developing diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and stroke. Mortality pre-
dictions were reasonably close to those from actual life tables. These results 
are consistent with another study of 9035 individuals that found that over-
weight and obese adults aged 51–61 predicted that their weight will reduce 
their life expectancy by an average of 2.5 and 4 years, respectively. 22 
 The obese also face penalties for being overweight in the labor  market. 23 
Economists Charles L. Baum II and William F. Ford fi nd that both men 
and women experience a persistent obesity wage penalty during the fi rst 
two decades of their careers. 24 Another study fi nds that obese white females 
earn 11.2 % less than their nonobese counterparts, with a difference in 
weight of roughly 65 pounds associated with a 9 % difference in wages. 25 
Another study fi nds that obese workers who receive employer- sponsored 
health insurance pay for their higher medical costs by receiving lower cash 
wages than nonobese workers. 26 
 One possibility is that the obese may be putting less effort into control-
ling their weight in response to advances in medical technology that lessen 
the health consequences of being obese. Economists Eric A. Finkelstein 
and Kiersten L. Strombotne argue that recent drug and surgical treat-
ments for high cholesterol, blood pressure, and other risk factors that obe-
sity promotes are important reasons why obese adults exhibit better blood 
pressure and cholesterol concentrations than normal-weight individuals 
did a few decades ago. 27 The obese may therefore be less likely to make an 
effort to decrease their weight because they have processed information 
on reduced health consequences. 
 Whether the obese are unaware that they are penalized in the labor 
market, that they live shorter lives, or that they experience improved 
health prospects because of advances in medical technology remain open 
issues that merit further study. But even if the obese are well informed, 
many would surely prefer to weigh less. 
 NUDGE THEORY BASICS 
 Individuals are not always rational when it comes to eating, according to 
behavioral economists. 28 Irrational decisions are believed to contribute to 
undesired weight gain when individuals do not realize how much food 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 199
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

they actually eat. One study by eating-behavior researchers Brian Wansink 
and Jeffery Sobal concludes that test subjects underestimated the number 
of daily food-related decisions by an average of more than 221 decisions 
in what the authors refer to as “mindless eating.” 29 
 Behavioral economists frequently propose setting default options that 
nudge people toward healthier eating. Plate shapes and sizes, lighting, 
color, and convenience are a few of the hidden environmental factors 
believed to increase consumption norms and decrease consumption moni-
toring. 30 Eating-behavior researcher Brian Wansink suggests the following 
default option changes aimed at lessening temptations to overeat 31 :
•  Store tempting foods in less-convenient locations (such as basements 
or top cupboards). 
•  Do not leave serving bowls and platters on the dinner table. 
•  Reduce the convenience of stockpiled foods by boxing them up or 
freezing them. 
•  Replace short, wide glasses with tall, narrow ones. 
•  Reduce serving sizes and consumption by using smaller bowls and 
plates. 
•  Use smaller spoons rather than larger ones. 
 The following passage from  Nudge demonstrates that Wansink’s 
experimental research on “mindless eating” has heavily infl uenced nudge 
theory 32 :
 In another Wansink (2006) masterpiece, people sat down to a large bowl 
of Campbell’s tomato soup and were told to eat as much as they wanted. 
Unbeknownst to them, the soup bowls were designed to refi ll themselves 
(with empty bottoms connected to machinery beneath the table). No mat-
ter how much soup subjects ate, the bowl never emptied. Many people just 
kept eating, not paying attention to the fact that they were really eating a 
great deal of soup, until the experiment was (mercifully) ended. Large plates 
and large packages mean more eating; they are a form of choice architecture, 
and they work as major nudges. (Hint: if you would like to lose weight, get 
smaller plates, buy little packages of what you like, and don’t keep tempting 
food in the refrigerator). 33 
 Other experiments have also found that altering choice architecture 
infl uences eating. One study by a team of psychologists found that slight 
200 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

changes in the accessibility of foods in a cafeteria salad bar reduced intake 
by 8–16 %. 34 Making food slightly more diffi cult to reach (varying prox-
imity by 10 inches) and changing sizes and accessibility of serving uten-
sils were two such changes. A team of eating-behavior researchers also 
found that moving healthier foods to the convenience line in a high school 
lunchroom, where unhealthy foods were usually placed, increased sales of 
healthy foods by 18 %, but decreased sales of unhealthy foods by 28 %. 35 
 Limiting the hours during which restaurants may be open or operate 
drive-up windows and forbidding placement of candy near cash registers 
at stores are examples of changing choice architecture by imposing search 
or travel costs. Former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s pro-
posal to ban sugary beverages in portions over 16 ounces also attempted 
to steer consumers away from excessive soda consumption. These changes 
are not nudges, however, even though they are based on paternalism and 
attempt to steer consumers toward healthier food choices. Instead, they 
are tools of hard paternalism as they raise costs for consumers or ban cer-
tain food choices outright. 
 CRITICISMS OF GOVERNMENT NUDGE THEORY 
 Nudge theory draws both praise and criticism. This section summarizes 
criticism that focuses on nudges aimed at steering individuals toward 
weight loss. 
 The Evidence Is Far from Settled 
 Empirical evidence on nudges indicates that they do not always work out 
as planned. One study by a group of nutritionists found that altering plate 
sizes had no signifi cant effect on energy intake at meals eaten in three 
laboratory experiments. 36 Participants made signifi cantly more trips to the 
buffet when they were given the smallest plate in one of these experiments. 
 Nutrition researchers recently reviewed studies that experimentally 
manipulated the dishware size to determine if such a change in choice 
architecture lowered subsequent food intake. 37 Nine experiments from 
eight publications were eligible for inclusion. The majority of experiments 
found no signifi cant difference in food intake, leading authors to conclude 
that evidence to date does not show that dishware size has a consistent 
effect on food intake. 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 201
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Adding “healthy” options to “unhealthy” meals is also problematic. 
One study authored by marketing professors fi nds that the mere pres-
ence of a healthy food option vicariously fulfi lls nutrition goals and 
provides consumers with a license to indulge, thus exerting ambiguous 
effects on overall diets. 38 Psychologists also report “negative calorie illu-
sion,” whereby adding a healthy option to weight-conscious individuals’ 
unhealthy meals decreases their perception of the meals’ calorie content. 
For example, weight-conscious participants estimated that a hamburger 
alone contains 734 calories but only 619 calories when accompanied 
by celery sticks. 39 Studies also suggest that restaurants claiming to serve 
“healthy” foods may cause diners to underestimate the caloric density of 
their foods and that diners are more likely to purchase higher-calorie side 
dishes at restaurants that claim to offer “healthy” foods when compared 
with those not making such claims. 40 
 Nutrition researchers have recently suggested that a simple and inex-
pensive strategy to increase vegetable consumption is to use large plates—a 
recommendation clearly opposed to the conventional wisdom of behav-
ioral economics. 41 Their controlled laboratory experiment investigated 
whether a standard (27 cm) plate vs. large (32 cm) size infl uenced the 
composition of a meal and the total meal energy of 83 participants invited 
to serve themselves lunch from a buffet containing 55 items. Plate size had 
no signifi cant effect on the total energy of the meal, but participants using 
a large plate served themselves signifi cantly more vegetables. 
 Labeling requirements are designed to help individuals who routinely 
underestimate calories, fats, and other attributes of foods. 42 Studies have 
found that labeling improves calorie estimates, but evidence so far does 
not clearly demonstrate that required labels result in healthier eating 43 . 
A study of New York City’s 2008 law requiring restaurant chains to post 
calorie counts fi nds no change in calories purchased after the law was 
passed. 44 A similar conclusion was reached in a study of menu-labeling 
regulation in King County, Washington. 45 A study of mandatory calorie 
posting on purchase decisions at Starbucks fi nds virtually no change in 
purchases of beverage calories. 46 Providing daily, per-meal, or no calorie 
recommendations to randomized subsets of adult customers entering two 
McDonald’s restaurants had no effect on purchases in another study. 47 
Calorie labeling did not infl uence what patrons of a large chain bakery café 
ordered for lunch in still another study. 48 
 Obesity researchers recently examined the effect of menu labeling with 
both caloric information and exercise equivalents on food selection. 49 
202 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Exercise equivalents defi ne how much time doing particular physical activ-
ities is needed to burn off calories in foods. For example, a 300-calorie 
hamburger requires about 75 minutes of walking. Calories ordered by a 
sample of 62 females, ages 18–34, who ordered fast food meals were not 
altered by this approach. 
 Confl icting evidence on nudge effi cacy may stem from the fact that 
nudges are often based on laboratory experiments. There are well-known 
problems in extrapolating results from laboratory experiments to the real 
world. 50 Participants’ choices in experiments are infl uenced by factors that 
include fi nancial incentives, how choices are framed, the nature of others’ 
scrutiny, and participant selection. Real-world decisions are made under cir-
cumstances not easily mimicked in laboratories. A recent review of the evi-
dence on the effectiveness of calorie labeling examines 31 studies published 
from January 1, 2007 through July 19, 2013. 51 Of the 31 studies reviewed, 
18 were conducted in “real world” settings and focused on actual food pur-
chases. “Real world” studies found that calorie labels do not reduce total 
calories ordered. Additionally, a review of 12 studies altering choice archi-
tecture found that studies were generally of short duration, had question-
able methodology, and were not conducted in “real world” environments. 52 
 Overconfi dence in nudge effi cacy probably explains some rather 
ambitious claims. One study by psychologists claims that very small but 
cumulative decreases in food intake from modest changes in accessibility 
and sizes of serving utensils may be suffi cient to “erase obesity” over a 
period of years. 53 Eating-behavior researcher Brian Wansink argues that 
small changes in choice architecture allow people to “effortlessly control 
their consumption and lose weight in a way that does not necessitate the 
discipline of dieting.” 54 Thaler and Sunstein appear to overstate as well: 
“Consider the issue of obesity.… There is overwhelming evidence that 
obesity increases risks of heart disease and diabetes, frequently leading to 
premature death. It would be quite fantastic to suggest that everyone is 
choosing the right diet, or a diet that is preferable to what might be pro-
duced with a few nudges.” 55 
 In sum, the empirical evidence suggests that nudges are a particularly 
blunt and possibly ineffective tool for addressing obesity. 
 Choice Architects Are Also Human 
 Behavioral economists rarely question why choice architects themselves 
are not subject to the same decision-making fl aws as other people. It is 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 203
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

often assumed that choice architects, for example, mostly escape the irra-
tional decision-making that behavioral economists believe affects so many 
individuals, and they know all relevant information about individuals’ true 
preferences. 56 Economist Niclas Berggren examined behavioral econom-
ics articles in ten highly ranked economics journals from 2000 through 
2009 to determine whether the authors had addressed the rationality or 
cognitive ability of policymakers. 57 Berggren found that 20.7 % of all arti-
cles contained a policy recommendation and that 95.5 % of these did not 
contain any analysis of the rationality or cognitive ability of policymakers. 
Only two of the 67 articles with a policy recommendation contained an 
assumption or analysis of policymakers of the same kind as that applied to 
economic decision makers. 
 Choice architects are also implicitly assumed to not fall victim to the 
many presumptions and myths surrounding obesity, as previously dis-
cussed. These are (1) small sustained changes in energy intake or expen-
diture will produce large, long-term weight changes; (2) setting realistic 
goals in obesity treatment is important because otherwise patients will 
become frustrated and lose less weight; and (3) large, rapid weight loss is 
associated with poorer long-term weight outcomes than is slow, gradual 
weight loss. The previous discussion includes various examples of over-
stated promises that a few small nudges can signifi cantly dent population 
weight. These would appear to be based more on myths regarding “small 
changes” than on factual evidence. 
 Past Government Nudges May Have Promoted Obesity 
 Investigative journalist Nina Teicholz argues that the US government fos-
tered dietary changes that contributed to our growing weight problem 
and diabetes prevalence through its emphasis on limiting consumption 
of eggs, butter, milk, and meat, while bulking up on carbohydrate-rich 
foods like pasta, bread, fruit, and potatoes. 58 Such guidelines are con-
tained in the Dietary Guidelines for Americans jointly published by the US 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) every fi ve years. Teicholz believes that the low-fat 
nutrition advice of the past 60 years has harmed public health by espous-
ing the myth that low-fat (especially low saturated fat) is the best diet. 
 Government promoted the notion that obesity and heart disease are 
linked to the consumption of fats when, in 1992, the USDA introduced 
the “Food Guide Pyramid.” This pyramid-shaped diagram represents the 
204 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

“optimal” number of servings to be eaten each day from each of the basic 
food groups. This pyramid recommended that the majority of calories 
(up to 11 servings per day) should come from complex carbohydrates—
primarily breads, cereals, rice, pasta, potatoes, and other starches—while 
relegating meats, fi sh, eggs, and other protein sources to 2–3 servings per 
day. Fats were also to be used sparingly. The Food Guide Pyramid was last 
updated in 2005 and then replaced by MyPlate in 2011, which slightly 
downplayed grains as the most important dietary ingredient by making 
vegetables the largest “slice.” 
 Despite a lack of evidence supporting low-fat diets, only in 2010 did 
the Dietary Guidelines committee stop recommending limits on total fat. 
A meta-analysis of all available evidence recently published in the  Annals 
of Internal Medicine concludes that current evidence does not clearly sup-
port high consumption of polyunsaturated fatty acids and low consump-
tion of total saturated fats. 59 The authors note that, while saturated fats 
moderately raise “bad” LDL cholesterol, this does not apparently lead to 
adverse health outcomes such as heart attacks and death. 
 Ironically, obesity prevalence began rising noticeably around 1980, the 
year in which the Dietary Guidelines were introduced, leading to ques-
tions surrounding the unintended role of government in promoting obe-
sity in the USA through its nudges on dietary choices. Meanwhile, recent 
Gallup polls demonstrate that most citizens remain committed to avoiding 
fat in their diets, with nearly twice as many Americans saying that they 
actively avoid fat in their diet (56 %) as say they actively avoid carbohy-
drates (29 %). 60 
 MARKET NUDGING THEORY 
 It’s no secret that many of us are concerned with our weight. A recent 
Gallup poll found that 51 % of adult Americans want to lose weight, 
although only 25 % are seriously working toward that goal. 61 People were 
undoubtedly eating on smaller plates, avoiding buffets, and skipping des-
serts for many years before behavioral economics came to light. Apparently, 
Americans are lowering caloric intakes. The USDA reports that average 
daily caloric intake declined by 118 calories (about 5 %) between 2006 and 
2009 among working-age adults. 62 
 Markets nudge all the time, as Thaler and Sunstein acknowledge. Thaler 
and Sunstein, however, appear to strongly favor government nudges rather 
than market nudges when they argue, “Markets provide strong incentives 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 205
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

for fi rms to cater to the demands of consumers, and fi rms will compete to 
meet those demands, whether or not those demands represent the wisest 
choices.” 63 Moreover, they state, “The key point here is that for all their 
virtues, markets often give companies a strong incentive to cater to (and 
profi t from) human frailties, rather than to try to eradicate them or to 
minimize their effects.” 64 
 Thaler and Sunstein (2008) use the term “planner” to describe a far-
sighted nudger with the ability to identify welfare-enhancing choices for 
individuals who suffer from various decision-making fl aws. The following 
passage provides an interesting take on market nudging:
 Even when we’re on our way to making good choices, competitive markets 
fi nd ways to get us to overcome our last shred of resistance to bad ones. At 
O’Hare Airport in Chicago, two food vendors compete across the aisle from 
each other. One sells fruit, yogurt, and other healthy foods. The other sells 
Cinnabons, sinful cinnamon buns that have a whopping 730 calories and 24 
grams of fat. Your Planner may have set the course for the yogurt and fruit 
stand, but the Cinnabon outlet blasts the aromas from their ovens directly 
into the walkway in front of the store. Care to guess which of the two stores 
always has the longer line? 65 
 This view suggests that sellers that provide “unhealthy” products are 
the most profi table, thus placing blame squarely on sellers who exploit 
consumers’ faulty decision-making. This view, however, appears out of 
sync with the views of the general public. Economists Jayson Lusk and 
Brenna Ellison conducted a nationwide study of 800 individuals in the 
USA in order to assess blame given to seven different entities (food 
 manufacturers, grocery stores, restaurants, government policies, farmers, 
individuals, and parents). 66 Eighty percent said individuals were primarily 
to blame for the rise in obesity, followed by 59 % placing blame on par-
ents. Apparently, people believe they themselves are mostly responsible for 
weight gain. 
 An alternative view is that sellers can systematically profi t when mar-
keting “healthier” products to customers interested in controlling their 
weight. The fi nding that 51 % of adult Americans want to lose weight 
indicates that many potential customers are looking for products that will 
help them do this. Food and restaurant businesses have been increasingly 
experimenting with smaller plates and packages to meet growing con-
sumer demand for products that help them control their weight. Research 
indicates that the number of small plates and smaller-portion items at 
206 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

restaurants has grown 32 % since 2009. 67 Of course, few customers would 
single out calories as the only attribute of interest. Calories are one attri-
bute along with price, taste, convenience, appearance, size, storage, and 
others. 
 Eating-behavior researcher Brian Wansink and former Arkansas 
Governor Mike Huckabee describe the importance of sellers:
 Food companies are not focused on making people fat, but on making money. 
If they are not profi table, their shareholders will abandon their stocks, fi re 
their executives, put their employees out of work, bankrupt their suppliers, 
and collapse their pension funds. The fi rst steps toward an obesity solution 
do not involve increased government regulation; they involve market- based 
changes that help consumers develop a new appetite for healthy foods. 68 
 “Stealth health” is the tactic that food and restaurant businesses employ 
to make products healthier when they don’t want to directly inform cus-
tomers they are cutting fat or salt. 69 A concern is that customers some-
times connect healthy with less taste, especially when foods are considered 
indulgences, such as mashed potatoes, gravy, stuffi ng, and other items typ-
ically loaded with sodium and fat. Otherwise, companies are quick to tout 
nutritional improvements for foods aimed at health-conscious consumers. 
 Public health researchers Sara N. Bleich, Julia A. Wolfson, and Marian 
P. Jarlenski examined menu items in 66 of the 100 largest US restaurant 
chains in 2012 and 2013. 70 Mean calories among items on menus in both 
2012 and 2013 did not change, but there were overall declines in calories 
(average of 56 calories, 12 % decline) in newly introduced menu items. 
Declines were concentrated mainly in new main course items (–67 calo-
ries, 10 % decline), although new beverage (–26 calories, 8 % decline) and 
children’s (–46 calories, 20 % decline) items also had fewer mean calories. 
 Evidence on Market Nudges 
 Huge market for weight control. Products and services designed to help 
people change their behavior are part of the large and growing market 
in “behavioral technologies.” They represent the market equivalent of 
nudges. 
 Marketdata Enterprises (2013) estimates that the weight-loss market 
was $60.5 billion in 2013 and almost evenly split in dollar terms between 
weight-loss products and services. 71 The breakdown is:
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 207
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

•  Diet soft drinks ($20.64B) 
•  Artifi cial sweeteners ($2.53B) 
•  Diet dinner entrees ($2.16B) 
•  Prescription diet drugs ($0.54B) 
•  Meal replacements and OTC diet pills ($2.8B) 
•  Diet books and exercise DVDs ($1.13B) 
•  Commercial chains (e.g., Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig) ($3.34B) 
•  Health clubs ($22.6B) 
•  Weight-loss surgery ($2.85B) and 
•  Medical programs ($1.87B) 
 Industry promotion of health food. A widely reported study concludes 
that 16 of the nation’s leading food and beverage companies collectively 
sold 6.4 trillion fewer calories in 2012 than they did in 2007. 72 These 
companies had pledged to lower calories and have so far exceeded their 
2015 goal by more than 400 %. However, it remains unclear what effect 
this reduction in calories sold exerts on population weight. Consumers 
may substitute other products and alter their behaviors in other ways that 
make predictions ambiguous at best. 
 Clearer evidence comes from a USDA study conducted by economist 
Steve W. Martinez showing rapid growth of new products appealing to 
weight-conscious consumers. 73 Displaying health claims is considered 
evidence of growing awareness of obesity-related issues. Health- and 
nutrition- related claims (HNR) per product increased from 2.2 in 2001 to 
2.6 in 2010, which the author interprets as competition fostering a more 
complete representation of products’ health and nutritional attributes. 
Claims related to gluten, antioxidants, and omega-3s ranked among the 
leading HNR claims. The study suggests that growing demand for food 
products that contribute to overall health beyond basic nutrition provided 
incentives to manufacturers to supply and promote these products. The 
largest increase in HNR claims from 2001 to 2010 was for “no gluten,” 
followed by “no trans fats.” 74 
 The same study fi nds that voluntary use of HNR claims on new food 
products was an important component of food companies’ marketing 
strategies. The percentage of new food products carrying HNR claims 
grew from 25 % in 2001 to 43 % in 2010. Claims related to calories, whole 
grains, fi ber, sugar, and vitamins and minerals were important contribu-
tors to the growth in HNR claims on new products after 2001. Sales of 
new products introduced in 2009 and 2010 with nutrient content claims 
208 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

exceeded those of all new food products with a range from 8 % higher to 
28 % higher. Again, there is no direct evidence that population weight has 
changed as a result. 
 A study of Nielsen sales data from 2007 through 2011 from grocery 
stores, drug stores, and mass merchandisers reports similar results. 75 Food 
products by 15 of the largest food and beverage manufacturers were classi-
fi ed into traditional and “better-for-you” (BFY) categories. BFY products 
included those designated as diet, lite, fewer calorie, or zero calorie (e.g., 
Lean Cuisine, Coca-Cola Zero, Tropicana 50) as well as “good” foods, 
including whole-grain products and healthier traditional product for-
mulations such as Cheerios, Dannon yogurt, and Nabisco Wheat Thins. 
Traditional products (i.e., not BFY items, such as Pepsi, Kellogg’s Frosted 
Flakes, and Hellmann’s Mayonnaise) accounted for 61.4 % of sales, while 
“lite” and “good” products each accounted for 19.3 % of sales. BFY prod-
ucts accounted for less than 40 % of sales but accounted for more than 
70 % of sales growth. Again, there is no direct evidence that population 
weight has changed as a result. 
 Not all health claims are based on solid evidence that such products 
are “healthier” or even support weight loss. It has been reported that 
almost one-third of Americans are trying to avoid gluten, a protein found 
in grain. 76 This behavior has led to a market of gluten-free products esti-
mated at $23.3 billion in 2013. Yet many health experts believe there is 
little to no benefi t from gluten-free products for most Americans because 
few people cannot process the protein. Ironically, some supposedly health-
ier gluten-free foods contain more sugar, less fi ber, and fewer vitamins 
than their counterparts with gluten. In other words, growth in gluten-free 
products might promote weight gain for some people. 
 The expanding market for “healthier” products is evidence that con-
sumers and producers are responding to growing concerns regarding pop-
ulation weight. But evidence so far is more suggestive than conclusive that 
these trends have resulted in population weight loss. 
 Employer interest in weight reduction. Employers have incentives to 
nudge overweight employees toward weight loss to the extent that excess 
weight harms productivity and increases health costs. Numerous experi-
ments are ongoing by businesses dedicated to designing nudges that work 
well. 
 A team of economists examined whether 1868 employees in 17 commu-
nity colleges and 12 universities in North Carolina who achieved clinically 
signifi cant weight loss of at least 5 % had reduced medical expenditures 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 209
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

and lowered absenteeism. 77 The authors fi nd some evidence of productiv-
ity gains, but no reduction in medical expenditures, but the authors sug-
gest anticipated reductions may occur over longer periods. 
 Another study fi nds no evidence that “lifestyle management or well-
ness” nudging at PepsiCo lowered employer health costs, but nudges 
aimed at helping people with chronic diseases to stay healthy apparently 
do. 78 Disease-management nudges (e.g., text message reminders for tak-
ing medicine) lowered health care costs by $136 per member per month, 
driven by a 29 % reduction in hospital admissions. Workplace wellness 
programs did not show a similar reduction in costs. 
 Offering overweight individuals fi nancial incentives is another approach. 
Economists John Cawley and J.A. Price report modest results from their 
examination of workplace wellness programs (2635 workers across 24 
worksites) that offered fi nancial rewards and deposit contracts for weight 
loss. 79 This study examines various deposit contracts where participants 
put their own money at risk if they failed to achieve weight-loss goals. This 
method attempts to increase motivation to reach goals when individuals 
suffer from “loss aversion bias,” whereby people feel the pain of a loss 
more than the pleasure of a gain. Workers offered fi nancial rewards did 
not exhibit higher year-end weight loss than those in the control group, 
but those who made deposit contracts had year-end weight loss that was 
two pounds greater than that of the control group. Cawley and Price sug-
gest rewarding loss of fat and gain of muscle or even rewarding behavior 
change rather than weight loss as means of improving incentives. 
 A recent article in the  Wall Street Journal describes other efforts by 
employers to nudge workers toward better health. 80 Johnson & Johnson 
employees receive a $500 credit toward their annual medical premium if 
they participate in a health assessment. Workers at CVS Health Corp. who 
don’t complete an annual health screening pay $600 more per year for 
their insurance premiums. JetBlue Airways Corp. contributes up to $400 a 
year into employees’ health savings accounts for about 45 different activi-
ties such as participating in smoking-cessation programs and completing 
Ironman races. Businesses navigate concerns that range between sow-
ing discontent among workers and inviting legal complaints when they 
attempt to steer worker health. The article, for example, suggests that 
workers are wary of anything that smacks of coercion as indicated by a sur-
vey that found that 62 % of respondents said it is inappropriate to require 
workers to pay more for their health insurance if they don’t participate in 
wellness programs. 
210 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Apps and weight-loss fi rms. A survey of more than 6000 people in six 
countries (Australia, Canada, India, South Africa, the UK, and the USA) 
found that more than half of consumers are interested in buying wearable 
technologies such as fi tness monitors for tracking physical activity and man-
aging their personal health. 81 There are more than 40,000 health, fi tness, 
and medical apps currently available that focus on healthy eating, weight 
management, fi tness, healthy living, smoking cessation, stress manage-
ment, and sleep. 82 They display information, show preloaded instructions 
for diet and fi tness, record and display user-entered data, and track weight 
measurements over time. Social networks such as Facebook, Twitter, and 
LinkedIn are increasingly used as platforms for healthcare marketing of 
new behavioral technologies, with recommendations from friends being 
particularly effective in promoting sales of weight-loss products. 83 
 One market test of apps is whether they encroach on the turf of more 
traditional businesses. Falling share prices of several widely recognized 
weight-loss companies suggest their businesses are being undermined by 
mobile technology. 84 Jenny Craig has performed poorly with its plan of 
prepackaged meals with nutritional counseling. Nutrisystem has struggled 
with its model providing home-delivered meal plans and nutritional coun-
seling. Weight Watchers, too, has struggled with attracting new custom-
ers. 85 Weight Watchers in 2012 added a mobile app for tracking food and 
activity, but this feature was an add-on to its paid subscription. Many apps, 
however, are free and do not require monthly payments for a base sub-
scription bundled with services such as menus and counseling. 
 StickK.com creates precommitment contracts, an approach advocated 
by behavioral economists to help people with self-control problems. 
 StickK.com is designed to promote healthier lifestyles by allowing users 
to create contracts that nudge them into achieving personal goals that 
include losing weight, exercising regularly, quitting smoking, and main-
taining weight. Individuals sign legally binding contracts that send their 
money to third parties, including either individuals or a number of orga-
nizations and charities, in the event they fail to stick to their contracts. As 
of December 15, 2014, there were 271,514 commitment contracts with 
$19,028,336 in deposits by users of  StickK.com . Users had created a total 
of 300,659 workouts and refrained from smoking 2,502,250 cigarettes. 
Use of  StickK.com is free. 
 Rapid expansion of weight-loss and health apps provides strong evi-
dence that consumers are sampling the growing number of behavioral 
technologies offered by markets for weight-loss and health apps. Markets 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 211
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

are, in effect, the choice architects of these behavioral technologies, and 
businesses have fi nancial incentives to meet this growing demand. The 
evidence on whether these nudges are effective is more promising than 
certain at this point. 
 MARKET NUDGING IS MORE PROMISING THAN 
GOVERNMENT NUDGING 
 Nudge theory can play a role in helping us lose weight, despite the previous 
discussion indicating that all choice architects—government or market—
are imperfect. Experimentation is the key to overcoming choice architects’ 
imperfections, including fl awed decision-making, basing nudges on per-
vasive myths regarding weight loss, and the inability to know individual 
preferences. Any of these imperfections could be fatal, but market choice 
architects hold signifi cant advantages over those in governments. 
 Businesses face “market tests” in a world where consumers may reject 
products that fail to deliver value. Consumers eventually understand 
whether marketing claims are real or not, with poorly designed products 
being improved or simply removed from markets. Evidence is imperfect 
so far on whether currently available products result in weight loss, but 
ongoing feedback from consumers helps to weed out poor designs. All 
product attributes, including calories, size, packaging, taste, simplicity, 
and pricing, receive market scrutiny. 
 Government choice architects do not face comparable “market tests” 
and thus face greater problems overcoming their imperfections. Poor 
products do not directly jeopardize the fi nancial solvency of governments 
because they do not face profi t constraints. Businesses that provide nudges 
that do not enhance consumer welfare are not profi table for long in com-
petitive environments such as those aimed at weight-conscious consumers. 
 Thaler and Sunstein argue we should not be too concerned about 
imperfect or ineffective nudges. 86 They argue that the noncoercive nature 
of government nudges allows easy exiting by those wishing to avoid them. 
But this argument simply acknowledges that poorly designed nudges can 
easily be avoided. This view suggests that there is little harm in designing 
numerous nudges because some government nudges might help people 
meet their weight-loss goals. This is not an approach, however, that allows 
researchers to easily parse out effective from ineffective nudges or discern 
what interrelationships might exist among the many nudges. It is also pos-
sible that nudges that turn out to be harmful might never be discarded. 
212 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 The fact that it took decades for the USDA to stop encouraging low-fat 
diets demonstrates that regulators do not face strong incentives to correct 
themselves. That many consumers continue to avoid fat indicates that incor-
rect nudges may not be so harmless. Unfortunately, there appears to be 
little interest in examining how attempts to alter behavior in one area may 
lead to unanticipated changes in other areas that are potentially harmful. 87 
 This view that ineffective but easily avoided nudges are not harmful 
fails to recognize the superiority of markets in helping choice architects 
overcome their various imperfections. Consumers directly signal to mar-
ket choice architects which products are ineffective or detrimental. They 
simply stop buying them, thus leaving little doubt that product attributes 
do not meet their approval. Harmful products might yield costly lawsuits 
directly aimed at businesses. Businesses read these signals routinely because 
they threaten their fi nancial health. Market nudges face not only market 
tests but also competitive pressures from other fi rms thus providing strong 
incentives to continuously improve the effectiveness of their nudges. 
 Government nudging suffers from higher hurdles in getting nudges 
“right.” Their nudges do not have to withstand “market tests.” 
Government revenues do not rise or fall to signal the good from the bad. 
Government employees typically are not fearful that failed products place 
their jobs in jeopardy. Effective feedback becomes even more problem-
atic when governments supply many nudges based on the view that they 
pose little harm since citizens can easily avoid them. Feedback is limited 
at best for government choice architects in an environment where ineffec-
tive nudges do not directly jeopardize their jobs or fi nancial viability. In 
effect, government nudges represent “government guesses” that are not 
constrained by “market tests.” 
 Markets are also superior at being true to the noncoercive spirit of 
nudging theory. Businesses do not have incentives to keep nudging those 
unwilling to change their behavior. They may try to educate customers 
unwilling to buy their products, but fi nancial incentives are a clear limit 
facing businesses that continue nudging consumers toward products they 
do not purchase. Low-calorie snacks, for example, may sit on the shelves 
no matter where the grocer locates them or how many advertising dollars 
are invested. Markets will eventually get the message and either alter prod-
uct attributes or drop products altogether. 
 Governments have considerably more latitude to repeatedly nudge people 
toward behavior that choice architects believe improves their lives. It can be 
diffi cult to determine when changes in choice architecture cross the line into 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 213
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

coercion, especially when government choice architects believe people exhibit 
decision-making fl aws or are resistant to educational nudges. A slippery slope 
problem may arise. Noncoercive but ineffective nudges may also engender 
coercive policies (e.g., taxes and subsidies) as government choice architects 
remain convinced that people’s behavior should change. Government choice 
architects therefore must exercise considerable restraint in resisting urges to 
“ramp up” the pressure on citizens that resist their nudges. 
 ROLE FOR GOVERNMENT 
 An appropriate role for government is to facilitate market correction of 
fraudulent practices and claims that may undermine consumer trust in the 
whole weight-loss industry and lead them away from potentially helpful 
solutions. Most consumers do not have the expertise to judge claims and 
government can speed up the process by which deceptive products are 
taken off the market. 
 For instance, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) recently fi ned sev-
eral weight-loss businesses $34 million after it concluded that they made 
deceptive advertising claims that their products would help people lose 
weight with little effort. 88 The $34 million included a $26.5 million settle-
ment against Sensa Products LLC, which markets a dietary supplement 
called Sensa that weight-conscious consumers may sprinkle on foods. One 
Sensa advertisement stated that “whether you need to lose 10 pounds, 50 
pounds or more, now you can without dieting. Simply sprinkle Sensa on, 
eat all the foods you love and watch the pounds come off.” 
 Economists at the FTC argue that advertising from the weight-loss 
industry is frequently misleading, confusing and even deceptive. 89 In 
one study the authors found evidence of consumer deception in 65 % 
of all weight-loss ads that employed unproven testimonials and before/
after photos. More than 57 % promised rapid weight loss beyond realistic 
expectations, and, more than 41 % falsely stated that diet aids result in 
long-term weight loss. 
 Examples provided by the FTC include:
•  “awesome attack on bulging fatty deposits … has virtually eliminated 
the need to diet.” (Konjac root pill) 
•  “They said it was impossible, but tests prove [that] my astounding 
diet-free discovery melts away…5, 6, even 7 pounds of fat a day.” 
(ingredients not disclosed) 
214 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

•  “The most powerful diet pill ever discovered! No diet or workout 
required. The secret weight-loss pill behind Fitness models, Show 
Biz and Entertainment professionals! No prescription required to 
order.” (ingredients not disclosed) 
•  “lose up to 30lbs… No impossible exercise! No missed meals! No 
boring foods or small portions!” (plant extract fucusvesiculosus) 
•  “lose up to 8 to 10 pounds per week… [n]o dieting, no strenuous 
exercise.” (elixir purportedly containing 16 plant extracts) 
•  “my 52lbs of unwanted fat relaxed away without dieting or grueling 
exercise.” (hypnosis seminar) 
•  “no exercise…[a]nd eat as much as you want – the more you eat, the 
more you lose, we’ll show you how.” (meal replacement) 
 Policies that penalize or remove fraudulent claims help consumers 
receive accurate information about the products they purchase. 
 CONCLUSION 
 Obesity remains a serious health problem, and it is no secret that many 
people want to lose weight. Behavioral economists typically argue that 
nudges help individuals with various decision-making fl aws live longer, 
healthier, and better lives. This paper has also argued that even if the obese 
are not subject to these fl aws, many are still interested in products that 
help them lose weight. 
 Nudges remain well-intentioned but blunt tools for lowering population 
weight. This conclusion is not surprising given the current state of knowl-
edge. Researchers have yet to reach a consensus on what specifi c causes for 
excessive weight gain are most important in explaining rising obesity rates. 
There are also relatively few facts about how to successfully lose weight, and 
the evidence does not fully support many widely held beliefs. The empirical 
evidence also indicates that nudges do not always work as planned. 
 Market nudges play a potentially important role in helping citizens con-
trol their weight. The evolving markets in apps, weight-loss programs, and 
“healthy” products indicate that many consumers are willing to purchase 
products that help them with their weight-loss goals. Worksite programs 
aimed at enhancing worker productivity and reducing health costs indi-
cate that businesses are also interested in products that work well. The 
evidence so far is more promising than conclusive that markets have been 
effective in nudging people to lose weight. 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 215
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Experimentation is the key to overcoming choice architects’ imperfec-
tions, including fl awed decision-making, basing nudges on various myths 
regarding weight loss, and the inability to know individual preferences. 
Choice architects in markets hold signifi cant advantages over those in 
governments; however, in their efforts to overcome these shortcomings. 
Unlike governments, businesses face “market tests” in a world where 
consumers reject products that fail to deliver value. Government nudges 
represent “government guesses” that are not constrained by “market 
tests.”Markets also hold an advantage in sticking to the noncoercive spirit 
of nudging theory. 
 Past experience with government recommendations supporting low-fat 
diets suggests caution when it comes to government nudging since pro-
moting diets rich in complex carbohydrates such as breads, cereals, rice, 
pasta, potatoes, and other starches may have unintentionally promoted 
obesity. Caution would also be prudent before recommending that gov-
ernments experiment with market-based nudges on their own workforces 
or perhaps experiment with social programs whose costs are infl uenced by 
obesity. Governments can be expected to resist utilizing nudges that yield 
cost savings because governments do not face profi t motives. Government 
choice architects may also prefer to design their own nudges, even though 
they face higher hurdles in designing effective nudges than market choice 
architects do. 
 NOTES 
 1. Katherine M. Flegal, Margaret D. Carroll, Brian K. Kit, and Cynthia 
L. Ogden, “Prevalence of Obesity and Trends in the Distribution of 
Body Mass Index Among U.S. Adults, 1999–2010,”  Journal of the 
American Medical Association 307(5) (2012): E1–E7. The authors 
also note that the rise in obesity prevalence appears to have leveled off 
in recent years. 
 2. Eric A. Finkelstein, Olga A. Khavjou, Hope Thompson, Justin G. 
Trogdon, Liping Pajn, Bettylou Sherry, and William Dietz, 
“Obesity and Severe Obesity Forecasts Through 2030,”  American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine 42(6) (2012): 563–70. Severely 
obese is defi ned [by who??] as being 100 or more pounds 
overweight. 
 3. John B. Dixon, “The Effect of Obesity on Health Outcomes,” 
 Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 316 (2010): 104–8. 
216 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 4. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions About Health , 
 Wealth ,  and Happiness. 
 5. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions About Health , 
 Wealth ,  and Happiness , 74. 
 6. John Komlos and Marek Brabec, “The Trend of Mean BMI Values of 
US Adults, Birth Cohorts 1882–1986 Indicates that the Obesity 
Epidemic Began Earlier than Hitherto Thought,”  American Journal 
of Human Biology 22(5) (2010): 631–38. 
 7. Richard V. Burkhauser, John Cawley, and Maximilian D. Schmeiser, 
“Differences in the U.S. Trends in the Prevalence of Obesity Based 
on Body Mass Index and Skinfold Thickness,”  Economics and Human 
Biology 7(3) (2009): 207–18. 
 8. John Cawley and Richard V. Burkhauser, “Beyond BMI: The Value of 
More Accurate Measures of Fatness and Obesity in Social Science 
Research,”  Journal of Health Economics 27 (2008): 519–29. 
 9. James R. Hebert, David B. Allison, Edward Archer, Carl J. Lavie, and 
Steven N. Blair, “Scientifi c Decision Making, Policy Decisions, and 
the Obesity Pandemic,”  Mayo Clinic Proceedings 88(6) (2013): 
593–604. 
 10. Sara N. Bleich, Y. Claire Wang, Youfa Wang, and Steven L. Gormaker, 
“Increasing Consumption of Sugar-sweetened Beverages Among US 
Adults: 1988–1994 to 1999–2004,”  American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition 89(1) (2009): 372–81. 
 11. John Cawley,” The Economics of Childhood Obesity,”  Health Affairs 
29(3) (2010): 364–71. 
 12. Zhenxiang Zhao and Robert Kaestner, “Effects of Urban Sprawl on 
Obesity,”  Journal of Health Economics 29(6) (2010): 779–87. 
 13. Nicole I. Larson, Mary T. Storey, and Melissa C. Nelson, 
“Neighborhood Environments: Disparities in Access to Healthy 
Foods in the U.S.,”  American Journal of Preventive Medicine 36(1) 
(2009): 74–81. 
 14. Darius Lakdawalla and Tomas Philipson, “The Growth of Obesity 
and Technological Change,”  Economics and Human Biology 7(3) 
(2009): 283–93. 
 15. David Wallinga, “Agricultural Policy and Childhood Obesity: A Food 
Systems and Public Health Commentary,”  Health Affairs 29(3) 
(2010): 405–10. 
 16. Hebert, Allison, Archer, Lavie, and Blair, “Scientifi c Decision Making, 
Policy Decisions, and the Obesity Pandemic.” 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 217
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 17. N. V. Dhurandhar, D. Schoeller, A. W. Brown, S. B. Heymsfi eld, D. 
Thomas, T. I. A. Sørensen, J. R. Speakman, M. Jeansonne, D. B. 
Allison, “Energy Balance Measurement: When Something Is Not 
Better Than Nothing,”  International Journal of Obesity 13, November 
2014 (early online). 
 18. Krista Casazza, Kevin R. Fontaine, Arne Astrup, Leann L. Birch, 
Andrew W. Brown, Michelle M. Bohan Brown, Nefertiti Durant, 
Gareth Dutton, E. Michael Foster, Steven B. Heymsfi eld, Kerry 
McIver, Tapan Mehta, Nir Menachemi, P. K. Newby, Russell Pate, 
Barbara J. Rolls, Bisakha Sen, Daniel L. Smith, Diana M. Thomas, and 
David B. Allison, “Myths, Presumptions, and Facts About Obesity,” 
 New England Journal of Medicine 368(13) (2013): 446–54. 
 19. Kathryn A. Kaiser, Andrew W. Brown, Michelle M. Bohan Brown, 
James M. Shikany, Richard D. Mattes, and David B. Allison, 
“Increased Fruit and Vegetable Intake Has No Discernible Effect on 
Weight Loss: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis,”  American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition , published online on June 25, 2014. 
 20. United States Department of Agriculture. 2013. Choose My Plate. 
Available at:  http://www.choosemyplate.gov / (cited December 17, 
2014). 
 21. Eric A. Finkelstein, Derek S. Brown, and W. Douglas Eva, “Do Obese 
Persons Comprehend Their Personal Health Risks?”  American 
Journal of Health Behavior 32(5) (2008): 508–16. 
 22. Tracy A. Falba and Susan H. Busch, “Survival Expectations of the 
Obese: Is Excess Mortality Refl ected in Perceptions?”  Obesity Research 
13(4) (2005): 754–761. 
 23. There do not appear to be empirical studies examining whether obese 
individuals understand this penalty, however. 
 24. Charles L. Baum II and William F. Ford, “The Wage Effects of 
Obesity: A Longitudinal Study,”  Health Economics 13(9) (2004): 
885–99. 
 25. John Cawley, “The Impact of Obesity on Wages,”  Journal of Human 
Resources 39(2) (2004): 451–74. 
 26. Jay Bhattacharya and M. Kate Bundorf, “The Incidence of the 
Healthcare Costs of Obesity,”  Journal of Health Economics 28(3) 
(2009): 649–58. 
 27. Eric A. Finkelstein and Kiersten L. Strombotne, “The Economics of 
Obesity,”  American Journal of Clinical Nutrition , 91(supp.), (2010): 
1520S–4S. 
218 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 28. David R. Just and Collin R. Payne, “Obesity: Can Behavioral 
Economics Help?”  Annals of Behavioral Medicine 38(1) (2009): 
47–55. 
 29. Brian Wansink and Jeffery Sobal, “Mindless Eating: The 200 Daily 
Food Decisions We Overlook,”  Environment and Behavior 39(1) 
(2007): 106–23. 
 30. Brian Wansink, “From Mindless Eating to Mindlessly Eating Better,” 
 Physiology &  Behavior 100(5) (2010): 454–63. 
 31. Brian Wansink, “Environmental Factors That Increase the Food 
Intake and Consumption Volume of Unknowing Consumers,” 
 Annual Review of Nutrition 24 (2004): 455–79. 
 32. It should be noted, however, that Wansink does not directly argue for 
government nudges as he uses his experimental fi ndings to argue that 
consumers can use his results to make better decisions. 
 33. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions about Health , 
 Wealth ,  and Happiness , 44. 
 34. Paul Rozin, Sydney Scott, Megan Dingley, Joanna K. Urbanek, Hong 
Jiang and Mark Kaltenbach, “Nudge to Nobesity I: Minor Changes 
in Accessibility Decrease Food Intake,”  Judgment and Decision 
Making 6 (2011): 323–32. 
 35. Andrew S. Hanks, David R. Just, Laura E. Smith, and Brian Wansink, 
“Healthy Convenience: Nudging Students Toward Healthier Choices 
in the Lunchroom,”  Journal of Public Health 34(3) (2012): 
370–76. 
 36. Barbara J. Rolls, Liane S. Roe, Kitti H. Halverson, and Jennifer S. 
Meengs, “Using a Smaller Plate Did Not Reduce Energy Intake at 
Meals,”  Appetite 49 (2007), 652–60. 
 37. E. Robinson, S. Nolan, C. Tudur-Smith, E. J. Boyland, J. A. 
Harrold, C. A. Hardman, and J. C. G. Halford, “Will Smaller 
Plates Lead to Smaller Waists? A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis of the Effect that Experimental Manipulation of Dishware 
Size Has on Energy Consumption,”  Obesity Reviews 15(10) (2014): 
812–821. 
 38. Karen Wilcox, Beth Vallen, Lauren Block and Gavan J. Fitzsimons, 
“Vicarious Goal Fulfi llment: When the Mere Presence of a Healthy 
Option Leads to an Ironically Indulgent Decision,”  Journal of 
Consumer Research 36(3) (2009): 380–93. 
 39. Alexander Chernev, “The Dieter’s Paradox,”  Journal of Consumer 
Psychology 21(2) (2011): 178–83. 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 219
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 40. Pierre Chandon and Brian Wansink, “The Biasing Health Halos of 
Fast-Food Restaurant Health Claims: Lower Calorie Estimates and 
Higher Side-Dish Consumption Intentions,”  Journal of Consumer 
Research 34(3) (2007): 301–14. 
 41. E. Libotte, M. Siegrist, and T. Bucher, “The Infl uence of Plate Size 
on Meal Composition. Literature Review and Experiment,”  Appetite 
82 (2014): 91–96 
 42. It should be understood that labeling requirements can also be justi-
fi ed on the basis of neoclassical economic theory when they lower 
search costs and alleviate asymmetric information problems. 
 43. Brian Elbel, “Consumer Estimation of Recommended and Actual 
Calories at Fast Food Restaurants,”  Obesity 19(10) (2011): 
1971–78. 
 44. Brian Elbel, Rogan Kersh, Victoria L. Brescoll, and L. Beth Dixon, 
“Calorie Labeling and Food Choices: A First Look at the Effects on 
Low-Income People in New York City,”  Health Affairs 28(6) (2009): 
1110–21. 
 45. Eric A. Finkelstein, Kiersten L. Strombotne, Nadine L. Chan, and 
James Krieger, “Mandatory Menu Labeling in One Fast-Food Chain 
in King County, Washington,”  American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine 40(2) (2011): 122–27. 
 46. Brian Bollinger, Phillip Leslie, and Alan Sorensen, “Calorie Posting in 
Chain Restaurants,”  American Economic Journal :  Economic Policy 
3(1) (2011): 91–128. 
 47. Julie S. Downs, Jessica Wisdom, Brian Wansink, and George 
Loewenstein, 
“Supplementing 
Menu 
Labeling 
with 
Calorie 
Recommendations to Test for Facilitation Effects,”  American Journal 
of Public Health 103(9) (2013): 1604–9. 
 48. Sarah L. Rendell and Charles Swencionis, “Point-of-Purchase Calorie 
Labeling Has Little Infl uence on Calories Ordered Regardless of 
Body Mass Index,”  Current Obesity Reports , published online June 
26, 2014. 
 49. Charles Platkin, Ming-Chin Yeh, Kimberly Hirsch, Ellen Weiss 
Wiewel, Chang-Yun Lin, Ho-Jui Tung, and Victoria H Castellanos, 
“The Effect of Menu Labeling with Calories and Exercise Equivalents 
on Food Selection and Consumption,”  BMC Obesity 1 (2014): 21. 
 50. Glenn W. Harrison and John A. List, “Field Experiments,”  Journal of 
Economic Literature 42(4) (2004): 1009–55; Steven D. Levitt and 
John A. List, “What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social 
220 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Preferences Reveal About the Real World?”  The Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 21(2) (2007): 153–74. 
 51. Kamila M. Kiszko, Olivia D. Martinez, Courtney Abrams, and Brian 
Elbel, “The Infl uence of Calorie Labeling on Food Orders and 
Consumption: A Review of the Literature,”  Journal of Community 
Health 39 (2014): 1248–1269. 
 52. L. R. Skov, S. Lourenço, G. L. Hansen, B. E. Mikkelsen, and C. 
Schofi eld, “Choice Architecture as a Means to Change Eating 
Behaviour in Self-Service Settings: A Systematic Review,”  Obesity 
Reviews 14(3) (2013): 187–96. 
 53. Rozin, Scott, Dingley, Urbanek, Jiang and Kaltenbach, “Nudge to 
Nobesity I: Minor Changes in Accessibility Decrease Food Intake.” 
 54. Wansink, “Environmental Factors That Increase the Food Intake and 
Consumption Volume of Unknowing Consumers,” 472–3. 
 55. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions about Health , 
 Wealth ,  and Happiness , 7. 
 56. Edward L. Glaeser, “Psychology and the Market,”  American Economic 
Review 94(2) (2004): 408–13; Mario J. Rizzo and Douglas G. 
Whitman, “The Knowledge Problem of New Paternalism,”  Brigham 
Young University Law Review 4 (2009): 905–68. 
 57. Niclas Berggren, “Time for Behavioral Political Economy? An Analysis 
of Articles in Behavioral Economics,”  The Review of Austrian 
Economics 25(3) (2012): 199–221. The ten journals are  American 
Economic Review ,  Journal of Finance ,  Quarterly Journal of Economics , 
 Econometrica ,  Journal of Financial Economics ,  Journal of Political 
Economy ,  Review of Financial Studies ,  Journal of Economic Theory , 
 Review of Economic Studies , and  Journal of Econometrics . 
 58. Nina Teicholz,  The Big Fat Surprise :  Why Butter ,  Meat ,  and Cheese 
Belong in a Healthy Diet (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2014). 
 59. Rajiv Chowdhury, Samantha Warnakula, Setor Kunutsor, Francesca 
Crowe, Heather A. Ward, Laura Johnson, Oscar H. Franco, Adam S. 
Butterworth, Nita G. Forouhi, Simon G. Thompson, Kay-Tee Khaw, 
Dariush Mozaffarian, John Danesh, and Emanuele Di Angelantonio, 
“Association of Dietary, Circulating, and Supplement Fatty Acids 
with Coronary Risk. A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis,”  Annals 
of Internal Medicine 160(6) (2014): 398–407 
 60. Andrew Dugan, “Americans Still Avoid Fat More Than Carbs,” 
Gallup, July 29, 2014.  http://www.gallup.com/poll/174176/
americans-avoid-fat-carbs.aspx?version=print 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 221
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 61. Allyssa Brown, “Americans’ Desire to Shed Pounds Outweighs 
Effort,” Gallup, November 29, 2013.  http://www.gallup.com/
poll/166082/americans-desire-shed-pounds-outweighs-effort.
aspx?version=print 
 62. Jessica E. Todd, “Changes in Eating Patterns and Diet Quality Among 
Working-Age Adults, 2005–2010,” Economic Research Report, 
Number 161, U.S. Department of Agriculture, January 2014. 
 63. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions About Health , 
 Wealth ,  and Happiness , 49. 
 64. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions About Health , 
 Wealth ,  and Happiness , 74. 
 65. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions About Health , 
 Wealth ,  and Happiness , 40. 
 66. Jayson L. Lusk and Brenna Ellison, “Who Is to Blame for the Rise in 
Obesity?”  Appetite 68 (2013): 14–20. 
 67. Annie Gasparro and Julie Jargon, “The Problem with Portions: 
Cheesecake Factory, Applebee’s, McDonald’s Struggle to Find the 
Size That Sells,”  Wall Street Journal , June 24, 2014. 
 68. Brian Wansink and Mike Huckabee, “De-marketing Obesity,” 
 California Management Review 47(4) (2005): 6–18, pages 
16–17. 
 69. Julie Jargon, “Less Salt, Same Taste? Food Companies Quietly 
Change Recipes. McDonald’s, Boston Market, Kraft Are under 
Pressure to Alter Formulas, but Consumers Don’t Always Like 
Them,”  Wall Street Journal , June 23, 2014. 
 70. Sara N. Bleich, Julia A. Wolfson, and Marian P. Jarlenski, “Calorie 
Changes in Chain Restaurant Menu Items. Implications for Obesity 
and Evaluations of Menu Labeling,”  American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine (online 2014). 
 71. Marketdata Enterprises, Inc., “The U.S. Weight Loss & Diet Control 
Market (12th Edition: March 2013),” Tampa, Florida. 
 72. The companies, acting together as part of the Healthy Weight 
Commitment Foundation (HWCF), pledged to remove 1 trillion 
calories from the marketplace by 2012, and 1.5 trillion by 2015. See 
Healthy Weight Commitment Foundation, “Major Food, Beverage 
Companies Remove 6.4 Trillion Calories from U.S. Marketplace,” 
January 8, 2014,  http://www.healthyweightcommit.org/news/
major_food_beverage_companies_remove_6.4_trillion_calories_
from_u.s._market/ 
222 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 73. Steve W. Martinez, “Introduction of New Food Products with 
Voluntary Health- and Nutrition-Related Claims, 1989–2010,” EIB-
108 Economic Research Service/USDA, February 2013. 
 74. Growth in “no trans fats” claims was partly caused by new labeling 
requiring disclosures of the trans fat content. 
 75. Hudson Institute, “Better-for-You Foods: It’s Just Good Business,” 
Obesity Solutions Initiative, Washington, DC, October 2011. 
 76. Julie Jargon, “The Gluten-Free Craze: Is It Healthy? Experts Question 
Benefi ts of Gluten-Free for All but a Small Minority,”  Wall Street 
Journal , June 22, 2014. 
 77. Marcel Bilger, Eric A. Finkelstein, Eliza Kruger, Deborah F. Tate, and 
Laura A. Linnan, “The Effect of Weight Loss on Health, Productivity, 
and Medical Expenditures Among Overweight Employees,”  Medical 
Care 51(6) (2013): 471–77. 
 78. John P. Caloyeras, Hangsheng Liu, Ellen Exum, Megan Broderick, 
and Soeren Mattke, “Managing Manifest Diseases, but Not Health 
Risks, Saved PepsiCo Money over Seven Years,”  Health Affairs 33(1) 
(2014): 124–31. 
 79. John Cawley and J. A. Price, “A Case Study of a Workplace Wellness 
Program That Offers Financial Incentives for Weight Loss,”  Journal 
of Health Economics 32(5) (2013): 794–803. 
 80. Lauren Weber, “Wellness Programs Get a Health Check,”  Wall Street 
Journal , October 7, 2014. 
 81. Leventhal, Rajiv, “Survey: Consumers Want to Track Health Data 
with Wearable Technologies,” January 6, 2014; see  http://www.
healthcare-informatics.com/news-item/survey-consumers-want-track-
health-data-wearable-technologies 
 82. Adam C. Powell, Adam B. Landman, and David W. Bates, “In Search 
of a Few Good Apps,”  Journal of the American Medical Association 
311(18) (2014): 1851–52. 
 83. Viju Raghupathi and Joshua Fogel, “Facebook Advertisements and 
Purchase of Weight-Loss Products,”  Journal of Medical Marketing 
13(4) (2013): 201–11. 
 84. Rachel Landen, “Obesity Rises, but Weight-Management Firms See 
Revenue Slimming,” November 21, 2013; see  http://www.modern-
healthcare.com/article/20131121/NEWS/311219948 ; 
accessed 
December 14, 2014. 
 85. Tess Stynes, “Weight-Loss Firm’s Shares Plummet on Forecast,”  Wall 
Street Journal , February 14, 2014. 
WEIGHT-LOSS NUDGES 223
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 86. Thaler and Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions about Health , 
 Wealth ,  and Happiness :  240 . 
 87. Paul Dolan and Matteo M. Galizzi, “Like Ripples on a Pond: 
Behavioral Spillovers and Their Implications for Research and Policy,” 
 Journal of Economic Psychology (2015): 1–16. 
 88. Jennifer C. Dooren, “FTC Cracks Down on Weight-Loss Product 
Marketers: Companies Ordered to Pay $34 Million to Settle Deceptive 
Advertising Claims,”  Wall Street Journal , January 7, 2014. 
 89. Richard L. Cleland, Walter C. Gross, Laura D. Koss, Matthew 
Daynard, and Karen M. Muoio, “Weight Loss Advertising: An 
Analysis of Current Trends,” Federal Trade Commission, Washington, 
DC, September 2002. 
224 
M. MARLOW
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

225
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_9
 Nudging in an Evolving Marketplace: How 
Markets Improve Their Own Choice 
Architecture 
 Adam   C.   Smith and  Todd   J.   Zywicki 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Behavioral economics (BE) and its applied counterpart, behavioral law 
and economics, are concerned with the nature of choice and how rational 
a person’s decision-making really is. From loss aversion to confi rmation 
bias, behavioral economists assert that people often act in ways that are at 
odds with what other economists assert to be rational behavior. To coun-
ter our supposedly biased predilections, behavioral theorists have urged 
policy experiments that would consciously alter individuals’ “choice archi-
tecture”—that is how choices are structured and presented to the con-
sumer—found in the marketplace. By, for example, changing the default 
choice option, people can be nudged into making different choices that 
behavioral planners believe will improve their welfare. 
 To date, BE remains plagued by methodological diffi culties that 
cast doubt upon the validity of many biases. For example, the so-called 
“endowment effect,” which had stood as supposedly one of the most well 
 A. C.  Smith () 
 Johnson & Wales University ,  Charlotte ,  NC ,  USA 
 T. J.  Zywicki 
 GMU Law School ,  Arlington ,  VA ,  USA 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

confi rmed of supposed biases, has been demonstrated to be little more 
than the artifact of experimental design and other fl aws. 1 The existence or 
prevalence of numerous other purported biases remains open to doubt as 
a result of the highly context-dependent nature in which they are found 
and the resulting diffi culty in replicating those results in a robust fashion. 2 
Multiple supposed biases can simultaneously apply to any given choice, 
and in many situations they predict inconsistent results with no means to 
reconcile those inconsistencies. In short, responsible policymakers should 
move with caution before designing behavioral-based policy experiments 
for human subjects. 3 
 Although the verifi ability of much of BE thus remains an open ques-
tion, that the approach has nevertheless found extensive application in 
the policy realm is not. In areas like consumer fi nance 4 and environmen-
tal regulation, 5 behaviorally infl uenced ideas are having a notable impact. 
Not all of this seems to be aimed at improving choices for consumers, but 
much of it is. And we can expect this trend to continue and expand into 
new regulatory fronts as policymakers fi nd further merit in the behavioral 
approach. 
 Despite this recent trend, improving choice architecture to help con-
sumers make better decisions is not a novel concept. Indeed, it is reason-
able to assume that improving how we make our choices is at least as old 
as choices themselves. If people act to better their condition, then we can 
assume that there is an inherent desire to make their choices align with their 
long-term well-being. Even when people do not act in their own interest, 
there is still a desire to make better choices in the future. 6 This is particu-
larly true when the externalities of choosing are relatively high such as when 
our choices affect others; that is, when additional people bear the cost of 
our choice, then the consequences of a biased decision become greater. 
 This brings us to the context of the market and how its choice archi-
tecture develops through a spontaneous process organized by dispersed 
persons and their limited knowledge of local conditions. Markets can only 
become sustainable when those wanting to exchange are satisfi ed with 
their choices. Happy customers are repeat customers. Thus businesses cru-
cially care about helping consumers make good decisions that will make 
them happy. “Money back guarantees” long ago replaced  caveat emptor 
as the prevailing ethic of consumer retailing. Competition between dif-
ferent fi rms ensures that customer dissatisfaction is unlikely to emerge as 
a long-run equilibrium outcome. Instead, those that fail to satisfy their 
customer’s preferences will be driven out of the market. 
226 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 To reiterate, the self-interest of profi t-maximizing businesses, urged on 
by competition, is the most powerful force yet invented to help consumers 
make satisfying choices. A fi rm whose customers constantly feel under-
served is begging for a competitor to come in and take their business. And 
in a real-life, dynamic, evolving economy, this is just what happens. For 
example, Netfl ix arose in part as a market solution to the excessive number 
of late fees charged by the then-dominant fi rm Blockbuster. Blockbuster 
relied on these late fees to generate suffi cient revenue for the fi rm and its 
“profi ts were highly dependent on penalizing its patrons.” 7 Focusing on 
whether the practice was unfair or exploitive of underlying consumer bias 
misses the larger point of the market’s ability to improve its own choice 
architecture. By providing a service that eschewed these fees, Netfl ix has 
replaced Blockbuster as the dominant fi rm with the latter company exiting 
the market altogether in 2010. 
 Simply put, markets demonstrate a tendency toward improving choice 
architecture in order to increase consumer satisfaction. The reason this 
isn’t recognized is that the process for this is complex, often unintended, 
and not confi ned to the choices of one or even a handful of people. It is 
instead the product of countless choices by both fi rms and consumers to 
improve their well-being. Furthermore, this process is unplanned, so it 
is only in hindsight that we can see which market innovations have led 
to better choices. This may not seem as blatant as government-imposed 
nudgemaking but is in fact a more durable, naturally occurring process. It 
may be true that fi rms would like to systematically exploit consumer biases 
if they could; it is also true that McDonald’s would like to charge $20 for 
a hamburger if they could. The reason why they generally do not isn’t 
because of the paternalistic benefi cence of the seller but rather the ruthless 
forces of competition that forces them to help, not exploit, their custom-
ers to make choices that will make them happy. 
 BE, by contrast, rests on a contrary view of market competition. Rather 
than a competition to satisfy consumer demand, BE frequently views mar-
ket processes as a competition to see which business can best exploit the 
alleged biases of their customers. 8 From hidden fees to low-quality goods, 
consumers are seen as little more than lambs to the slaughter to be “used 
by more sophisticated parties to take consumers’ money without giving 
value in return.” 9 In this model there would seem to be little room for 
fi rms to take actions that improve consumer decision-making. 
 Despite its novelty in the policy realm, however, the intervention-
ist arguments of behavioral economists are not fundamentally different 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 227
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

from earlier generations of paternalistic arguments for intervention based 
on alleged market failures that harmed consumers. Concerns over mar-
ket power, asymmetric information, and consumer impulsivity have long 
motivated arguments for regulation. But others have recognized that 
many of these supposed market “failures” have also produced a demand 
for market “solutions”—such as disruptive technology, advertising, repeat 
dealing, and branding to name a few—that ameliorate or eliminate these 
theoretical market failures in the real world. Treating consumers fairly, it 
turns out, usually makes good business sense. 
 Essential to this approach, however, is the understanding of markets as a 
dynamic process of discovery, a fl uid process of experimentation and search 
in a world of uncertainty and creativity. Consumers are not passive—even if 
they make mistakes, they tend to correct those mistakes over time. Moreover, 
many supposed choices that are deemed mistakes by BE theorists may in 
fact be rational, given a consumer’s particular preferences and constraints. 
Before arrogating power to steer consumer decisions by manipulating their 
choice architecture, the new generation of policymakers must make sure 
that they are actually making consumers better off in the short run and not 
shutting down a benefi cial process of discovery over the long run. 
 To illustrate how markets improve their own choice architecture, we 
will provide examples of various consumer fi nancial products that already 
incorporate some form of unrecognized private nudging. Credit cards, 
mortgages, and other basic banking services like overdraft protection 
are particularly rife with examples of this. Our framework helps organize 
and provide clarity to numerous consumer fi nancial products in a way 
that challenges current regulatory practices by illuminating the benefi cial 
order already provided by markets. We will also examine some examples 
of efforts by government regulators to create regulatory nudges that have 
displaced the existing choice architecture to determine whether central 
planning of nudges tends to produce better results for consumers than 
those evolved by the marketplace. 
 BEHAVIORAL BIAS IN AN EVOLVING, ECOLOGICALLY 
RATIONAL LANDSCAPE 
 The benefi cence of markets is something that has and likely always will be 
a topic of dispute. For many decades arguments against the free market 
have been levied on the grounds of market failure. 10 Characteristics like 
asymmetric information, externalities, and non-excludability have all been 
228 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

invoked to question whether markets truly allocate effectively. Taken to 
the extreme, any market not displaying conditions of perfect competition 
is susceptible to failure. After all, it is always possible to advance a strong 
claim by assuming the conclusion. The diffi culty with this position, of 
course, is that it posits markets as working only when conditions are unre-
alistic, thus ruling out effectiveness by assumption, not by demonstrated 
empirical relevance. 
 BE makes much the same critique of markets but from a different 
angle. Rather than challenge institutions, the behavioral approach chal-
lenges the individual’s rationality. Put another way, if perfect competition 
is an unrealistic assumption, so surely is that of perfect rationality on the 
part of consumers. So, much like the market failure argument, behav-
ioralists utilize a neoclassical characterization of markets as a foil for its 
critique. Invoking biases like loss aversion, confi rmation bias, and anchor-
ing effects, this approach shows that consumers are likely to err in their 
decision-making in ways that markets may not correct for; indeed they 
may even exploit them. 
 The policy conclusions that emerge from this perspective are largely 
interventionist, though not always as heavy-handed as the older market 
failure perspective. For example, soft paternalism as presented in the pop-
ular book  Nudge claims that biases can be rectifi ed with simple solutions 
like changing default choices, contextualizing information for consum-
ers, and providing fewer though more pointed choices. 11 Other theorists 
support stronger forms of intervention, however, that eliminate certain 
services altogether. 12 This hard paternalism is more reminiscent of the 
broader market failure approach. In addition, the coherence of the “soft 
paternalism” of nudging has been called into question—if central planners 
supposedly know enough to create effi cient “nudges” for consumers, it 
seems like a slippery slope to compulsion if consumers nevertheless per-
sist in “erroneous” decision-making. 13 So while BE claims to recommend 
lighter-touch interventionism than traditional regulation, this is not nec-
essarily clear in practice. 
 Although market failure and behavioral arguments share some dif-
ferences, at root they share an important similarity: a belief that profi t- 
maximizing fi rms operating in a competitive market will be unable to 
address these problems (or might even exploit them), therefore requiring 
government intervention. But at least with respect to traditional market 
failure arguments like asymmetric information, economists have long rec-
ognized that profi t-maximizing fi rms operating in a competitive market 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 229
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

have incentives to voluntarily provide information that will improve con-
sumer decision-making, and thereby, consumer welfare. Common market 
practices like advertising, investments in name brands, money-back guar-
antees, and the constraints of repeat dealing and reputation all serve, at 
least in part, to benefi t the consumer. 14 
 For all these reasons, the benefi ts of maintaining a good reputation 
typically outweigh any advantage that a seller can receive from ripping off 
consumers in the short run. So, for example, when a recent Consumer 
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) survey of consumers asked what they 
would do if they felt that their credit card issuer had mistreated them, 
the majority (57 %) said that they would simply cancel their card. 15 Given 
the implicit power that consumers hold to take their business elsewhere, 
it is little wonder that according to the data of one mid-sized bank, some 
two-thirds of complaints by consumers about bank fees are resolved in the 
consumers’ favor, resulting in the refunding of millions of dollars every 
year to customers. 16 Competition and the threat of loss of repeat business 
are powerful forces for treating customers fairly irrespective of the seller’s 
purported greater sophistication. 
 Furthermore, markets can improve choice architecture in ways that 
government cannot. For example, as discussed below, private advertising 
was much more effective at educating the public regarding the health ben-
efi ts of dietary fi ber than years of government public service announce-
ments and other educational efforts. 17 Moreover, credible third parties, 
such as  Consumer Reports magazine or Underwriter’s Laboratory accredi-
tation, can provide still further information to consumers regarding prod-
uct quality. 18 The fact that many consumers voluntarily pay attention to 
and are willing to pay for those third-party certifi cation services illustrates 
that they are aware of their limited knowledge and act to try to correct it 
before making purchase decisions. 
 So while the behavioral approach provides insight into the diffi culties 
of making strictly rational choices, its characterization of the market is 
just as wrongheaded as the older market failure approach it so closely 
resembles. Left to these approaches, the market would seem to be a fragile 
edifi ce on which exchange totters back and forth between sophisticated 
sellers and exploited consumers. Such an ineffective mechanism would 
seem to ill-serve its billions of everyday users. What this approach fails 
to address, though, is how markets have survived for so long as tools of 
human enterprise if they are in fact ineffective at getting people what they 
need. Discovering just how humans make their choices does nothing to 
230 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

diminish the fact that markets have been—and likely always will be—uti-
lized to coordinate those who wish to truck, barter, and exchange. 
 We believe the challenges made against markets have more to do with 
the background assumptions of the behavioralist, who sees any erring 
from perfection as an opportunity to tinker with highly complex market 
institutions. 19 We contend that such a notion only recognizes order when 
in a controllable form. In this way, behavioralists are no better than their 
neoclassical counterparts. Finding people coordinating all by themselves—
“in the wild” no less, as one prominent behavioral law and economics 
article put it 20 —only confi rms the prior assumption that people left to 
their own devices are incapable of making benefi cial choices, and hence is 
prima facie evidence of being ripe for tinkering. If instead the market is the 
product of an evolutionary, unguided process, then it’s not surprising that 
it little resembles the telltale fantasies of neoclassical theory. And though 
it is unplanned, the market is far from ineffective in getting people what 
they want. It coordinates among agents in a way that not only allows for 
but relies on people’s underlying biases. After all, it has grown up around 
them for thousands of years, long before behavioralists made the scene. 
 What we must distinguish is the difference between what is known by 
the behavioralist and what is known by those engaging in trade. Nobel 
prize winner and prominent experimentalist, Vernon Smith, provides 
an insightful comparison between these two perspectives of organizing 
human behavior: Constructive and Ecological Rationality. 21 As has been 
noted elsewhere, constructive rationality in effect limits itself by not allow-
ing for greater complexity than can be achieved by human design. 22 Put 
another way, this perspective demands the same market conditions as 
would be necessary for someone to understand the market environment 
in its totality. But we know from simple introspection that such knowledge 
is not just elusive but impossible to acquire. Leonard Read’s classic essay 
 I ,  Pencil demonstrates that no single person or organization even has the 
knowledge required to construct something as simple as a pencil from 
scratch, much less a comprehensive understanding of the market structure 
needed to create and deliver this product. 23 
 So how do markets function then? As our examples above demonstrate, 
the information market participants need is far more manageable than 
what is needed to understand them in their totality. Far from complete, 
information is instead localized to what Freidrich Hayek termed the “man 
on the spot.” 24 Each person in their own limited capacity contributes to 
the operation of the market by lending his or her knowledge and abilities 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 231
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

by, for example, knowing the market price of certain economics textbooks. 
While any one individual contribution is not likely to matter much, the 
total contribution matters quite a bit. Furthermore, individual actions lead 
to dispersed knowledge moving through the marketplace like electricity 
through a network. So what one person understands about a particular 
product helps in part to inform the market as a whole. 
 Economists, Pauline Ippolito and Alan Mathios, studied the role of 
advertising in educating consumers about the health benefi ts of dietary 
fi ber. 25 It was known for several years that a diet high in fi ber generated 
substantial health benefi ts. Yet it wasn’t until Quaker Oats began an adver-
tising campaign aimed at persuading consumers to purchase its oatmeal 
that general awareness of the health benefi ts of dietary fi ber spread. Not 
only did this advertising campaign lead to an increase in the amount of 
fi ber in American’s diets, it increased the general public awareness of the 
benefi ts of dietary fi ber. Moreover, Quaker Oats advertising campaign was 
particularly effective at reaching and improving the knowledge among 
lower-income families regarding the health benefi ts of fi ber. 
 To summarize our framework, rather than a fi xed strategy environment 
among perfectly (or imperfectly) rational agents as depicted from the con-
structive perspective, we argue the market instead resembles more what 
Vernon Smith labels an ecologically rational environment among locally 
informed persons that allows for multiple strategies (indeed an endless 
amount) played out among these different individuals over time. Few 
businesses can prosper by making one-time sales to consumers; most suc-
cessful businesses rely on repeat dealing with consumers to thrive over the 
long run. Moreover, the effects of repeat dealing are magnifi ed through 
the consideration of reputational constraints, as consumers who have good 
or bad experiences share those experiences with others, thereby persuad-
ing others to purchase or not purchase the products. What survives in this 
environment is likely to enhance, not hinder, choice. Obstacles that pro-
hibit individuals from engaging in meaningful exchange, such as constant 
exploitation of the consumer’s underlying bias, would lead to suboptimal 
outcomes over time. How this would survive in a dynamic environment 
largely defi ned by the individuals themselves is a challenge that behavioral-
ists need to meet on an empirical level. 
 We provide our own view on why consumer products have survived 
below, by fi rst examining a number of market nudges in the area of con-
sumer fi nance that serve to prod individuals in their preferred direction 
(the good). What makes these features so remarkable is that they are rarely 
232 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

even noticed. This is part of their advantage. If noticed, they would likely 
not serve well as nudges. In fact, many of the features of the market that 
behavioralists lament (the bad) actually serve as useful nudges to market 
participants. With that said, a number of market nudges are not the prod-
uct of fi rms competing to retain customers but instead represent policies 
imposed at the insistence of government policy (the ugly). These distort 
market outcomes in ways that are not likely to be in the consumer’s best 
interest. 
 To be clear, we are not making the claim that all government nudges 
are faulty, only that many that have been designed to improve consumer 
welfare have instead reduced it for a number of incentive-related rea-
sons we have detailed elsewhere. 26 In contrast, we show by example how 
profi t- seeking fi rms act as if they are seeking to improve the consumer’s 
choice architecture in a manner that enables consumers to improve their 
own welfare. In particular, we will argue that not only do markets often 
provide “nudges” that tend to improve consumer decision-making, but 
that in general market nudges are more likely to be effective at improving 
consumer welfare than nudges designed by policymakers. Or, to put the 
point more accurately, the decentralized, dynamic, discovery process of 
the market is more likely to generate welfare-improving nudges than the 
static, central-planning mindset of government bureaucrats seeking to 
construct nudges. Through a process of trial and error, consumer learn-
ing, and dynamic competition, markets tend to converge on the mix of 
products, services, and prices that maximize consumer welfare. And—
crucially—as part of that process, sellers as well as consumers have incen-
tives to seek to minimize the frequency and costs of the errors that they 
make. 
 MARKET NUDGES: THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE UGLY 
 Market nudges would seem almost a misnomer given how often behav-
ioralists link nudging with market intervention. Nevertheless, the concept 
itself—that is, manipulating choice architecture to improve consumer out-
comes—is something the market does every day. Better-served customers 
translate into greater profi t opportunities. As a consequence, there are 
countless untold examples of these features.  
We 
will 
focus 
on 
examples that vividly illustrate the market nudge concept in the domain of 
consumer fi nance, an area that has attracted a great deal of attention from 
behavioralists. 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 233
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 The chief outlet for behavioral interventions in this area is the CFPB 
which was established in reaction to the 2008–2010 fi nancial crisis. The 
CFPB is formally advised by a group of behavioralists, including  Nudge 
co-author Richard Thaler. 27 It has intervened in a wide variety of con-
sumer credit markets including credit card services, bank mortgages, stu-
dent loans, auto lending, and payday loans among others. 28 The CFPB 
ostensibly seeks to redress underlying behavioral biases by changing 
choice architecture in the marketplace. According to their website, “The 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) is a 21st century agency 
that helps consumer fi nance markets work by making rules more effective, 
by consistently and fairly enforcing those rules, and by empowering con-
sumers to take more control over their economic lives.” 29 
 As we will show, the CFPB intervenes in a market already fi lled with 
nudges. There are those created by private forces (“the Good”), those vili-
fi ed by behavioralists (“the Bad”), and those created by government inter-
ventions (“the Ugly”). By comparing these categories of nudges, we hope 
to shed light on how choice architecture is improved by markets already 
and why public nudging is more problematic than behavioralists believe. 
 “The Good” 
 You may have noticed when withdrawing your money at an ATM that the 
machine releases your card before giving you your cash. This would seem 
out of order. Wouldn’t it make more sense to give you your card back once 
the transaction is complete? It can even be a nuisance as you may want to 
make another transaction after withdrawing money which means you have 
to put your card in all over again. Before deciding “there ought to be a 
nudge!” to improve this clear market imperfection, consider just what 
sort of behavioral bias is common among bank customers. Customers 
withdrawing cash are often in a hurry and the most salient part of the 
exchange is receiving the money, not reclaiming the card. But leaving the 
card behind means at the very least ordering a new one and, at worst, pos-
sible identity theft by the next customer in line. 
 So how have banks responded? By nudging customers to take their 
card before releasing their cash, banks ensure that customers in a rush 
are not inconvenienced by a lost card. While this may cause frustration 
for those who wish to engage in additional transactions after withdrawing 
their cash, customers as a whole are better off. This example may seem 
simple and not very impressive in its scope but consider that the market is 
234 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

fi lled with helpful nudges like this. Do banks do this out of a paternalistic 
concern for their customers? It seems unlikely. Instead, the likely explana-
tion is that consumer errors (such as forgetting an ATM card) are expen-
sive for both the consumer  and the bank. When a consumer forgets his or 
her ATM card, the bank must take steps to retrieve the card and reissue it 
to consumers, as well as any additional security issues that may arise from 
a missing ATM card. Out of self-interest, a profi t-maximizing bank has 
adopted practices that appear to be a consumer-centered nudge. 
 Consumer use of debit cards provides another example of what some 
behavioralists might consider a pro-consumer nudge. The existence of 
debit cards—much less their extraordinary popularity—is inexplicable to 
orthodox behavioral law and economics scholars. For example, writing 
in 2006, Professor Oren Bar-Gill predicted that because of the compara-
tive advantage of credit cards in exploiting consumer behavioral biases 
(such as the so-called optimism bias), “without regulatory help [issu-
ers of debit cards could] expect only limited success vis-à-vis the credit 
card.” 30 This prediction that debit cards would never become a major 
market presence, which was compelled by the logic of BE, has proven 
spectacularly wrong. Indeed, even at the time that Bar-Gill made the 
statement in 2006, debit cards had already overtaken credit cards in 
terms of transaction volume and have only continued their explosive 
growth in the decade since. 31 
 The growth in debit cards came about with no regulatory interventions 
designed to subsidize them. Instead, they came about because of competi-
tion and consumer choice. There are myriad theories why consumers use 
debit cards instead of credit cards. In some instances, it appears explicable 
by rational choice theory—thus, those who revolve credit card balances 
are more likely to use debit cards than those who pay off their credit card 
balances every month. 32 Others have argued that it is best explained by 
various mental accounting models of consumers who distinguish between 
transactions that they prefer to make out of current funds via a debit card 
(such as gasoline and groceries) versus those that they see appropriate to 
fi nance with credit (such as purchasing consumer durables or vacation 
travel). Regardless, far from refusing to offer debit cards to consumers, 
banks have eagerly put debit cards in consumers’ hands, even creating 
rewards programs comparable to credit card rewards programs in order to 
induce greater use. 33 This widespread enthusiasm for banks to spur debit 
card use for consumers, especially by offering rewards and the like, has 
“nudged” some consumers toward greater use of debit cards. 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 235
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 One area in which the market is particularly good at nudging is with 
information retrieval. People are notoriously bad at fi ltering large amounts 
of information and are alleged by behavioral scholars to be susceptible to 
numerous biases due to framing effects, short attention spans, and confi r-
mation of their prior beliefs. 34 So it would make sense that fi rms would put 
certain fail-safes in place to avoid negative outcomes, both with their cus-
tomers and employees. An example that nudges the former group involves 
the use of credit scores. Firms regularly draw on credit score information 
of their customers even when it’s not entirely clear why a score is needed. 
One possibility for this practice is that a credit score serves to undermine 
any confi rmatory bias the lending agent may have in approving services. 
Dealing with a personal account can create favorable impressions that mask 
underlying issues with the customer’s true reliability. Relying on outside 
objective measurements can offset this bias and thereby reduce losses for 
the fi nancial institution by not making unsafe loans. 35 
 And of course outside measurement tools are not just for fi rms. Think 
of all the rating websites available to consumers such as Amazon, Carfax, 
Angie’s List, Rotten Tomatoes, yelp, and so on. By aggregating and dis-
tributing an enormous quantity of information in a simple, accessible form, 
these fi rms provide greater choice architecture for everyone. We should note 
that even the CFPB has gotten in on the act with their own database of con-
sumer complaints, though whether its purpose is to inform consumers or 
simply a way to hold leverage over fi nancial fi rms remains an open question. 
 “The Bad” 
 We next examine market practices that behavioralists point to as examples 
of nudges gone awry. We offer reasons why even some of the most vilifi ed 
practices are more likely to offset the customer’s prior behavioral bias than 
take advantage of it. One category of products behavioralists are particu-
larly hostile to is so-called “shrouded fees,” which encompass any and all 
products that serve as add-ons to primary products like car purchases, 
credit cards, and so on. An example of an add-on product that has been 
challenged by behavioralists is credit life insurance. 36 The way this service 
works is if the customer dies before fi nishing payment on a loan, the insur-
ance company will pay the remaining balance. Behavioralists claim that 
much like overdraft protection, this service is inordinately expensive rela-
tive to alternatives like general life insurance, which would cover any and 
all liabilities at the time of death. 
236 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Once again, however, we must think about the nature of the program, 
given that people are behaviorally biased, and not just ignorant of more 
attractive alternatives. While it’s true that an insurance product like this 
would benefi t sellers, the service can still be quite benefi cial for buyers. In 
fact, this is what a randomly controlled survey of households conducted 
by the Federal Reserve demonstrated. The Fed authors report, “It seems 
that the marketplace offers consumers a choice concerning the purchase 
of debt protection products and consumers exercise that choice as part 
of their fi nancial decisions about borrowing. While there may be abusive 
practices among some lenders who operate outside the realm of ethical 
behavior with respect to the sale of debt protection products, survey evi-
dence suggests that, in the views of consumers, such behavior is not the 
norm.” 37 
 Purchasing add-on insurance products is also a relatively low-cost 
means of signaling risk aversion to the insurance fi rm and can generate 
reduced insurance premiums as fi rms are able to estimate costs, and to 
some extent, minimize their liability in the event of casualty. Furthermore, 
it represents a specifi c obvious benefi t to the consumer. While comprehen-
sive life insurance could potentially take care of this liability and in some 
cases at lower cost, we cannot simply assume that consumers have access 
to or can afford these alternatives. 
 Now let’s turn to the much-vilifi ed banking service, overdraft protec-
tion. When a person overdrafts her account, the bank will supply the nec-
essary funds to cover the transaction, but for a fi xed fee. Customers can 
utilize this overdraft service or if they prefer (and if available) link their 
checking account to an additional savings account or credit line. Some 
customers use this service quite often. In fact, heavy users, which we will 
defi ne as those using the service ten times or more in a year,  provided about 
two-thirds of the overall revenue collected by banks for this service. 38 
 Some critics feel these users are being exploited by the overdraft system 
and demand that banks reduce fees. In recognition of this, in 2010 the 
Federal Reserve required that all banks change the default option to no 
overdraft protection, forcing those who wish to use the service to explic-
itly say so. The result, unsurprisingly, was that three times the number of 
heavy users explicitly signed up for the service compared to normal users. 39 
Put another way, it should come as no surprise to the rest of us that those 
who more heavily rely on the service would want to utilize it. The behav-
ioral response has been a call for hard paternalism by prohibiting banks 
from providing customers with this service. 40 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 237
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 The BE criticism of default rules regarding overdraft protection demon-
strates the dangers of displacing the ecologically rational, market-evolved 
rule (opt-out from overdraft protection) with the constructively rational, 
centrally planned rule (opt-in for point-of-sale debit card transactions and 
ATM transactions and opt out for checks and recurring debit card pay-
ments). The fact is that most consumers effectively “opt out” of overdraft 
protection by simply not overdrawing their account—the overwhelm-
ing majority of bank consumers never or rarely overdraft their accounts, 
including a majority of low-balance accounts. 41 In addition, we should 
note that the transaction costs of banks trying to contact consumers to 
get them to opt-in are much more diffi cult than for consumers to opt-out. 
When the rules were changed, banks had to make multiple phone calls 
and contacts to consumers to gain their consent to opt-in to overdraft 
protection. Even if a majority of consumers were to opt-out, it would still 
be much less expensive in total terms to retain the market rule of opt-out 
than the much more expensive opt-in regime. 
 More generally, the reality of overdraft protection shows the dangers 
of setting rules by the intuitions of government central planners rather 
than decentralized market processes. In particular, although the Federal 
Reserve conducted consumer research in establishing the default rules 
for overdraft protection, the answers to questions depend very heavily 
on the phrasing of the question. For example, according to one survey of 
consumers, when consumers were asked whether they would ever want 
access to overdraft protection, a small majority said “yes.” 42 But when 
they were asked whether they would want access to overdraft protection 
 in an emergency , an overwhelming majority said yes. In short, faced with 
the non-contextual question of overdraft protection generally, consumers 
had diffi culty anticipating the circumstances under which they might want 
access to overdraft protection. But when prompted by an unusual situ-
ation that they might not have considered, consumers overwhelmingly 
recognized the value of access to the product. By making overdraft protec-
tion opt-out instead of opt-in, banks appeared to be nudging consumers 
toward the decision that they would make if they were fully informed and 
could anticipate all of the possible scenarios under which they might over-
draw their accounts but might not make if they had limited information 
and attention at the time of opening their account. 43 
 The trouble with all this is that in making it more diffi cult for con-
sumers to gain access to overdraft protection, regulators can impose dis-
proportionately large costs on certain groups of consumers. Those who 
use overdraft protection frequently do so because they have limited credit 
238 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

options and overdraft protection is frequently the least-expensive and 
most-convenient source of short-term liquidity available. Many consum-
ers rely on overdraft protection to be able to afford products that are 
arguably necessities, such as groceries, fuel, and insurance payments. 44 
These are hardly superfl uous expenditures by uninformed persons. Those 
who want to “nudge” consumers away from overdraft protection—or still 
worse prohibit the product altogether—have focused only on the costs of 
overdraft protection and entirely ignored the benefi ts, that is, the ability to 
put food on the table and gas in the car without resorting to less preferred 
sources of credit. For many heavy users of overdraft protection, the next- 
best alternative available is a payday loan, bounced check, or late payment, 
all of which can be more expensive, especially in the long run. Moreover, 
the government’s preferred nudge rule seemed to have little basis in the 
real world. For example, according to the experience of one bank, when 
it was forced to adopt the rule of “opt-in” for ATM transactions, some 
95 % of customers who were confronted with an insuffi cient funds notice 
when they sought to make an ATM transaction consented to opt in. 45 The 
bank’s default rule again appeared to be more consistent with expressed 
consumer preferences than the government’s mandated default rule. 
 Another recent credit practice condemned by the CFPB is Marketing 
Services Agreements (MSAs), which establish a preexisting relationship 
between realtors and certain credit institutions. The idea is that upon pro-
cessing a real estate sale, the broker would identify the credit institution as a 
preferred lender and encourage the buyer to work with this particular lender 
in fi nancing the home. The CFPB has described this practice as an under-
handed means of generating kickbacks to realtors. The claim is that realtors 
make deals with credit institutions that may not be the best fi t for the future 
homeowner but promote them anyway based on the preexisting MSA. 46 
 Note fi rst of course that “best” is not a quality that can be defi ned 
by the CFPB. It can only be defi ned by the consumer. Furthermore, in 
the case of mortgage loans, the typical consumer is unlikely to have the 
prior knowledge necessary to discern between different loan agreements, 
much less different mortgage companies altogether. Government report-
ing requirements have been used to make these comparisons more easily. 
Further, household names like Bank of America can help provide certain 
reputational information. Still, boundedly rational consumers are surely at 
a disadvantage. This means that realtors have an opportunity to  provide 
additional support to their clients in the form of credit referrals. It’s pos-
sible that these recommendations could occur without the underlying 
MSAs. But then how would the realtor identify which institutions are 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 239
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

optimal for their clients? They could simply do the research themselves 
and charge the client accordingly. But this of course entails additional 
costs on top of the home purchase. Plus, even a proactive realtor can only 
know so much about the real competency of an outside fi rm. 
 Although it is conceivably possible that MSA relationships between 
realtors and lenders are merely sophisticated schemes to cheat consum-
ers, a more-benefi cent alternative explanation is readily available: MSAs 
are a service provided by the realtor to reduce the costs to the home pur-
chaser of fi nding a mortgage at a competitive rate and with high-quality 
service. In exchange for the stream of referrals provided by the realtor to 
the lender, the lender essentially promises to provide high-quality service 
and a good price. If the lender does not do so, the reputational damage 
will effect not just the lender but the realtor as well. Thus, the realtor has 
a strong incentive to ensure that the lender is providing quality service to 
its customers. In return, the stream of referrals provides a form of credible 
commitment from the broker to the realtor that high-quality service will 
be forthcoming. 47 Whereas the malign scenario rests on the idea that the 
realtor and broker can conspire to fl eece consumers over and over again, 
the benefi cent scenario proposes the arrangement as a value-increasing 
mechanism for reducing the cost and hassle to consumers of fi nding home 
fi nancing at a competitive rate and with minimal search costs. An incom-
petent fi rm could conceivably pay for the service as well. But then what 
would happen once they failed to provide for the realtor’s customers? This 
could potentially damage the realtor’s reputation, resulting in a termina-
tion of the MSA and a loss of any goodwill engendered by the agreement. 
Knowing this, only a lender serious in gaining clients would contract with 
the realtor, as a charlatan business would only meet with rejection once 
the realtor found out their customers were being ill-treated. 
 “The Ugly” 
 Not all nudges are the result of private enterprise. While the application 
of BE to the policy realm is in its infancy, the CFPB has been aggressive in 
taking action in consumer credit markets. Furthermore, we should note 
that historical policies aimed at behavioral change offer insight into what 
can emerge from public nudging, even if these policymakers were unaware 
of the later contributions from BE. 
 One of the earliest examples of government-induced market nudges 
occurred in response to the Great Depression, when a number of federal 
240 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

subsidies and programs were created to extend the payment period for 
long-term mortgages. Prior to this period, long-term mortgages were typ-
ically paid within a 10- to –15-year period with a large upfront deposit and 
balloon payment at the end. Policymakers felt at the time that reducing the 
monthly burden of payments would help generate much-needed growth. 48 
Moreover, fi xed-rate mortgages create waves of refi nancing activity as 
interest rates adjust, creating mortgage market instability and increasing 
the prepayment risks for banks. 
 Regardless of its short-term effects on increasing home ownership, 49 
the long-term result of this policy was to create the standard 30-year, 
fi xed-rate mortgage that dominates the US mortgage market. This effort 
to nudge consumers toward the 30-year fi xed-rate mortgage has proven 
quite problematic for consumers and the economy. The persistence of the 
30-year fi xed-rate mortgage is especially inexplicable given the pivotal role 
it played in precipitating the savings and loan (S & L) crisis of the 1980s. 
Forced to raise capital through short-term consumer deposit accounts and 
lend for long-term 30-year fi xed-rate mortgages, the interest rate mis-
match that precipitated the S & L catastrophe was virtually inevitable. And 
eventually, the high-infl ation period of the 1970s precipitated the savings 
and loan crisis on precisely this factor. 50 
 Yet despite this catastrophe caused by the dominance of the 30-year 
fi xed-rate mortgage, policymakers persisted in artifi cially maintaining its 
privileged position in the US mortgage market through the intervention 
of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Yet it is hard to see how consumers in 
general benefi t from being nudged into this product. After all, consum-
ers must pay a premium—frequently a large premium of over 100 basis 
points—in order to obtain a fi xed-rate mortgage. 51 This is because the 
consumer must compensate the fi nancial institution for holding the risk 
of a fi xed-rate asset for a full 30 years, an exceedingly long period for a 
fi nancial instrument. Yet the average American owns his or her home (and 
hence mortgage) only about fi ve years on average. Thus, the consumer is 
being nudged to buy 30 years of interest rate insurance, when it is likely 
that for the average consumer a fi ve- or ten-year fi xed-rate period (and 
hence a lower risk premium) would be optimal. For many consumers, 
the cost of this government nudge can amount to hundreds of dollars 
per month in higher monthly mortgage payments. Moreover, empiri-
cal evidence indicates that consumers typically choose wisely in deciding 
between fi xed- and adjustable-rate mortgages, based on their individual 
level of risk tolerance and expected duration of holding the mortgage. 52 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 241
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 As the last fi nancial crisis demonstrated, the dependence on the 30-year 
fi xed-rate mortgage not only harms many consumers who pay an implicit 
premium for unnecessary long-term interest rate insurance, it also increases 
economic instability during periods of falling housing prices. When the 
Federal Reserve pushed down interest rates to record- low levels, only those 
consumers with equity in their homes were able to refi nance. Those who 
were underwater (owed more than the home was worth) were trapped in 
higher interest rates and unable to take advantage of the Fed’s intervention. 
At the peak of the housing bust it was estimated that over 20 % of home-
owners were underwater, often by tens of thousands of dollars—and hence 
unable to refi nance if they held fi xed-rate mortgages because refi nancing 
would have required them to bring the difference to the closing table. In 
addition, even if they could refi nance these distressed homeowners would 
have been required to come up with thousands of dollars of liquid funds 
to refi nance. As a result, the Federal Reserve’s extraordinary interventions 
did little to stabilize the housing market because of the limited ability of 
homeowners to act. By contrast, although many countries in Europe suf-
fered housing bubbles comparable to that in the USA, their foreclosure 
rates were typically a fraction of those here, due in some part to the greater 
ability that banks had to push down mortgage interest rates as a result of 
the dominance of adjustable- rate mortgages in Europe. Nudging American 
consumers toward 30-year self-amortizing, mortgages with an unlimited 
right to prepay not only harmed many consumers by pushing them into 
higher interest rate loans than appropriate but also contributed to the depth 
of the mortgage crisis in the USA. 
 A similar outcome emerges when policymakers close off services that 
cater to low-income consumers. A perpetual adversary of supposed con-
sumer advocates is payday lending. With its high interest rates and poten-
tial for revolving service periods, the effi cacy of this service is constantly 
called into question. Consumer advocates believe that, rather than pro-
viding a service, payday lending really just captures the poor in a never- 
ending cycle of debt and hardship due to the terms of the loan. Based 
on this logic, in Spring 2015 the CFPB suggested that it was going to 
begin a new rule making on payday lending that would require lenders 
paternalistically to establish the borrower’s “ability to repay” the payday 
advance before making the loan. It is estimated that if the rule is  eventually 
adopted it would reduce the revenues of the payday lenders by over 80 % 
on average. 53 Moreover, by reducing access to payday loans, the rule will 
force many payday loan customers into greater use of bank overdraft pro-
tection, installment loans that require them to borrow larger principal 
242 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

amounts for longer periods of time, or late bill payments. Rather than 
attempt to nudge consumers, policymakers believe that removing the ser-
vice altogether is in the consumer’s best interest. 
 This exposes the dark side of public nudging. Once a product or service 
is considered  non gratis , policymakers quickly move from subtly changing 
choice architecture to outright elimination of the service, as suggested 
by the rapid rush to impose prohibitions on overdraft protection. After 
all, if the service can only do harm, wouldn’t removing it completely be 
the most effective means of increasing consumer benefi ts? This would be 
accurate if true. Unfortunately, policymakers rarely, if ever, conduct the 
kinds of empirical investigation needed to meet the evidentiary burden 
of determining that a service is in most cases ineffective and harmful to 
consumers. 
 Surveys of payday loan customers show that they, on average, are capa-
ble of accurately anticipating whether they will roll over their balances or 
not and how long it will take them to pay off their loan. 54 Payday loan 
customers also are acutely aware of the cost of payday loans, as one survey 
found that approximately 98 % of payday loan customers knew the fi nance 
charge of their most recent payday loan. 55 Finally, those who use payday 
loans do so because, despite their cost, they are often less-expensive than 
available alternatives such as overdraft protection, bounced checks, and 
pawn shops. Coupled with the fact that most customers report being satis-
fi ed with the service as a source of short-term credit 56 , it’s unclear  ex ante 
why the service is obviously harmful. It’s true that more attractive credit 
products are available to some consumers, especially to those who engage 
in academic scholarship or government service. But the alternatives open 
to payday lending customers are few. 57 
 Credit cards have also been the subject of behaviorally inspired govern-
ment nudges that have backfi red. For example, in 2009 Congress enacted 
the Credit CARD Act, which imposed new limits on the pricing of credit 
card terms (such as certain fees) and restricted the ability of credit card 
issuers to adjust interest rates and other terms when a borrower’s risk pro-
fi le changed. The law largely codifi ed existing Federal Reserve regulations 
that had been proposed and then become fi nal the year before. Behavioral 
scholars have endorsed the law, claiming that it eliminated so-called hidden, 
“non-salient,” or “shrouded” fees that credit card issuers used to exploit 
consumers. 58 Empirical studies of the effects of the Federal Reserve rules 
and the CARD Act, however, have found that their combined effects have 
proved disastrous for consumers. 59 Interest rates for all cardholders rose and 
the cost of other fees increased. In addition, credit card ownership decreased, 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 243
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

especially for lower-income families, and credit lines were reduced for many 
cardholders. In short, by intervening to regulate certain terms, the CFPB 
made credit cards more expensive and less available, forcing many lower-
income consumers to rely on payday lending to make ends meet. 
 PUBLIC VERSUS PRIVATE NUDGES 
 We have showcased a number of nudges from different variations of pri-
vate and public infl uence. Not everyone will agree with our choice of 
nudges or in how we present them. Surely there are some government 
nudges that can lead to better outcomes. For example, the Behavioral 
Insights Team (or Nudge Unit) within the UK cabinet has provided 
valuable insight into issues like collecting late court fees and how people 
respond to government documents. 60 And can we really say that all market 
nudges are benefi cial? Even the strongest market proponent would wince 
at the actuarial terms of certain extended warranties. 61 Clearly we should 
not rule either of these scenarios out. 
 At the same time, we wish to highlight the most likely scenarios given 
the institutional differences between market and political mechanisms. A 
fi rm that tries to exploit its customers with private nudges on an ongoing 
basis can only afford to do so under a very narrow set of market condi-
tions. At a minimum, such fi rms would need market power to ward off 
competitive pressures. Competing companies will undermine any such 
effort in the long run by either providing better quality services or gain-
ing market share by pointing out the exploitive efforts of its rival, as hap-
pened with our introductory example of Netfl ix running Blockbuster out 
of business. 
 Furthermore, market actors are more likely to be on the lookout for and 
adhere to feedback from consumers than their government counterparts. 
What reason does a bureaucrat have to acknowledge potential pitfalls of 
a nudge gone awry or alternatives that better utilize market forces when 
given a mandate from higher authority? By comparison, market nudges 
that harm consumers generate direct, negative feedback to fi rms who bear 
the cost of their choices. Firms that do not use nudges appropriately are 
likely to lose market share to those who do. 
 We showed above how government nudgers that do listen to negative 
feedback are likely to utilize stronger tactics in response. After all, negative 
feedback does not necessarily mean that the original goal is mistaken, and 
again policymakers have less incentive to reexamine their given mandate 
244 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

than their market counterparts. As a consequence, “the ugly” turns uglier. 
We see this with calls to ban overdraft services for certain consumers or 
the removal of payday lending services in some states. We also see this with 
add-on products as the CFPB has vilifi ed a number of practices regarding 
mortgage services, credit card products, and banking fees. 
 Finally, market participants engage in iterated exchanges with one 
another at a far greater rate than do consumers and government. An 
agency may only engage in a policy review twice a year. Markets have the 
advantage of gathering feedback on a daily basis. Nudges or other strate-
gies can be evaluated and altered according to this feedback much more 
often than can government policy. As we noted above, the nudges that 
work the best won’t even be observed by consumers. This is much more 
likely to happen with the receipt of constant feedback and adaptation, two 
qualities in which markets excel over government. 
 More important than comparisons of private and public changes to 
choice architecture, however, is the recognition of how the market func-
tions. Construing the market as a planned and plannable landscape dis-
torts the reality that none of us is capable of fully comprehending such 
a complex social order. We at best can make marginal changes that may 
or may not improve the overall landscape. Therefore, we are best served 
when recognizing the natural limits of our action and what mechanisms 
will be most effective in generating greater consumer well-being. 
 As we have explained, this is most likely to occur when market par-
ticipants have repeated exchanges that allow for lots of feedback and 
adaptation that ensure only the most competent fi rms will continue to 
serve consumers. Any attempts to alter this natural landscape from policy-
making risks distorting outcomes in unintended and unappreciated ways. 
Removing whole credit services from the marketplace rarely affects the 
person or persons responsible for their removal. But consumers of the 
products can face devastating consequences with little recourse to chang-
ing policy goals. 
 Indeed, by not allowing for alternative explanations of behavior, poli-
cymakers render themselves impotent in dealing with consumer feedback. 
Any information that comes from “in the wild” will only be placed within 
the policymaker’s prior beliefs on consumer rationality and the effi cacy of 
markets. New information only serves then to confi rm the goals already 
in place with the only change being how best to meet these goals, when 
instead policymakers should be evaluating the desirability and/or feasibil-
ity of the goals themselves. 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 245
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 To summarize, the marketplace is an ecological landscape in which 
complex, multifaceted strategies play out among imperfect persons. What 
emerges is a social order composed of plenty of rational and irrational ele-
ments. When we examine it as it is, rather than as we wish it would be, we 
can see plenty of evidence in its favor along with opportunities for positive 
change. To be most effective, though, these opportunities should be pursued 
in a way that accounts for the limits of human cognition, both by consumers 
and those who would instigate positive change. Only when working within 
the logical parameters of this social order can we hope to make it better. 
 NOTES 
 1. Kathryn Zeiler and Charles R. Plott, “The Willingness to Pay/
Willingness to Accept Gap, the Endowment Effect, Subject 
Misconceptions 
and 
Experimental 
Procedures 
for 
Eliciting 
Valuations,”  American Economic Review (2004). 
 2.  See Joshua D. Wright and Douglas H. Ginsburg, “Behavioral Law and 
Economics: Its Origins, Fatal Flaws, and Implications for Liberty.” 
 Northwestern University Law Review 106 (2012): 1033. 
 3. Todd Zywicki, “The Behavioral Law and Economics of Fixed-Rate 
Mortgages (and Other Just-So Stories),”  Supreme Court Economic 
Review 21(1) (2013): 157–214. 
 4. Adam Christopher Smith and Todd J. Zywicki, “Behavior, Paternalism, 
and Policy: Evaluating Consumer Financial Protection,”  George 
Mason Law & Economics Research Paper 14–05 (2014). 
 5. Ted Gayer and W. Kip Viscusi. “Overriding Consumer Preferences 
with Energy Regulations,”  Journal of Regulatory Economics 43(3) 
(2013): 248–264. 
 6. James M. Buchanan, “Natural and Artifactual Man,”  What Should 
Economists Do (1979): 93–112. 
 7. Greg Satell, “A Look Back At Why Blockbuster Really Failed and 
Why It Didn’t Have To.”  Forbes.com (2014)  http://www.forbes.
com/sites/gregsatell/2014/09/05/a-look-back-at-why-blockbuster-
really-failed-and-why-it-didnt-have-to/ 
 8. Geoffrey A. Manne and Todd J. Zywicki, “Uncertainty, Evolution 
and Behavioral Economic Theory,”  Journal of Law, Economics, and 
Policy 10 (2013): 555. 
 9. Oren Bar-Gill and Elizabeth Warren, “Making Credit Safer,” 
 University of Pennsylvania Law Review (2008): 1–101, p. 7. 
246 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 10. Joshua D. Wright, “The Antitrust/Consumer Protection Paradox: 
Two Policies at War with Each Other,”  Yale Law Journal ,  Forthcoming 
(2012): 12–45. 
 11. Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein,  Nudge (Yale University 
Press, 2008). 
 12. Ryan Bubb and Richard H. Pildes, “How Behavioral Economics 
Trims Its Sails and Why,”  Harvard Law Review 127 (2014): 13–29. 
 13. Mario J. Rizzo and Douglas Glen Whitman, “Little Brother Is 
Watching You: New Paternalism on the Slippery Slopes,”  Arizona 
Law Review 51 (2009): 685. 
 14.  See Benjamin Klein and Keith B. Leffl er, “The Role of Market Forces 
in Assuring Contractual Performance,”  Journal of Political Economy 
89 (1981): 615. 
 15. “Arbitration Study: Report to Congress.” Consumer Financial 
Protection Bureau (2015):  http://www.consumerfi nance.gov/
reports/arbitration-study-report-to-congress-2015/ 
 16.  See Jason Scott Johnston and Todd Zywicki, “The Consumer Financial 
Protection Bureau’s Arbitration Study: A Summary and Critique” at 
p. 32. Mercatus Working Paper (August 2015), available at  http://
mercatus.org/publication/consumer-financial-protection-
bureau-arbitration-study-summary-critique 
 17.  See discussion  infra at note 23, and accompanying text. 
 18.  See Daniel B. Klein (ed.), Reputation: Studies in the Voluntary 
Elicitation of Good Conduct (1997). 
 19. Vernon L. Smith, “Method in Experiment: Rhetoric and Reality,” 
 Experimental Economics 5(2) (2002): 91–110. 
 20. Ryan Bubb and Richard H. Pildes, “How Behavioral Economics 
Trims Its Sails and Why,”  Harvard Law Review 127 (2014): 13–29. 
 21. Vernon L. Smith, “Constructivist and Ecological Rationality in 
Economics,”  American Economic Review (2003): 465–508. 
 22. Peter J. Boettke, W. Zachary Caceres, and Adam G. Martin, “Error Is 
Obvious, Coordination Is the Puzzle,” in Roger Frantz and Robert 
Leeson (eds.),  Hayek and Behavioral Economics (Palgrave-MacMillan, 
Forthcoming, 2012), 12–23. 
 23. Leonard E. Read, “I Pencil: My Family Tree, as Told to Leonard E. 
Read” (1958), available at  http://www.econlib.org/library/Essays/
rdPncl1.html 
 24. Friedrich August Hayek, “The Use of Knowledge in Society,”  The 
American Economic Review (1945): 519–530. 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 247
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 25. P. M. Ippolito and A. D. Mathios, “Information, Advertising, and 
Health Choices: A Study of the Cereal Market.” in  Economics of Food 
Safety (Springer Netherlands, 1991), 211–246. 
 26. Adam Christopher Smith and Todd J. Zywicki, “Behavior, Paternalism, 
and Policy: Evaluating Consumer Financial Protection,”  George 
Mason Law & Economics Research Paper 14-05 (2014). 
 27.  Treasury Department Announces Senior Leadership Hires for CFPB 
Implementation Team , U.S. Dep’t of the Treasury (December 15, 
2010), 
available 
at 
skaddenpractices. skadden.com/cfs/attach.
php?documentID=1750 
 28. Adam Christopher Smith and Todd J. Zywicki, “Behavior, Paternalism, 
and Policy: Evaluating Consumer Financial Protection,”  New York 
University Journal of Law & Liberty (2015). 
 29. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, “About Us,”  http://www.
consumerfi nance.gov/the-bureau/ 
 30. Oren Bar-Gill, “Seduction by Plastic,”  Northwestern University Law 
Review 98 (2003): 1373. 
 31. T. A. Durkin, G. Elliehausen, and T. J. Zywicki, “An Assessment of 
Behavioral Law and Economics Contentions and What We Know 
Empirically About Credit Card Use by Consumers,”  Supreme Court 
Economic Review 22 (January 2014): 1–54. 
 32. T. A. Durkin, G. Elliehausen, and T. J. Zywicki, “An Assessment of 
Behavioral Law and Economics Contentions and What We Know 
Empirically About Credit Card Use by Consumers,”  George Mason 
Law & Economics Research Paper (2014): 14–46. 
 33. Debit card reward programs, however, have largely disappeared in the 
wake of the Dodd-Frank fi nancial reform legislation and particularly 
the so-called Durbin Amendment, which placed priced controls on 
debit card interchange fees.  See Zywicki, Manne, and Morris,  Price 
Controls on Debit Card Interchange Fees :  The U.S. Experience cite. 
 34. Daniel Kahneman,  Thinking ,  Fast and Slow (Macmillan, 2011). 
 35. See Geoffrey A. Manne and Todd J. Zywicki, “Uncertainty, Evolution, 
and Behavioral Economic Theory,”  Journal of Law ,  Economics and 
Policy ,  Forthcoming (2014): 14–04. 
 36. Tom Baker and Peter Siegelman, “‘You Want Insurance with That?’ 
Using Behavioral Economics to Protect Consumers from Add-on 
Insurance Products,”  Connecticut Insurance Law Journal 20 (2013): 
13–1. 
 37. T. Durkin and G. Elliehausen, “Consumers and Debt Protection 
Products: Results of a New Consumer Survey,”  Federal Reserve 
248 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Bulletin 98(9) (2012).  http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulle-
tin/2012/pdf/consumer_debt_products_20121227.pdf 
 38. Ryan Bubb and Richard H. Pildes, “How Behavioral Economics 
Trims Its Sails and Why,”  Harvard Law Review 127 (2014): 13–29. 
 39. Ryan Bubb and Richard H. Pildes, “How Behavioral Economics 
Trims Its Sails and Why,”  Harvard Law Review 127 (2014): 13–29. 
 40. Lauren E. Willis, “When Nudges Fail: Slippery Defaults,”  The 
University of Chicago Law Review (2013): 1155–1229. 
 41. Todd J. Zywicki, “The Economics and Regulation of Bank Overdraft 
Protection,”  Washington and Lee Law Review 69 (2012): 1141. 
 42. “Design and Testing of Overdraft Disclosures: Phase Two.” ICF 
Marco International, Inc. (2009).  http://www.federalreserve.gov/
newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20091112a4.pdf 
 43. As noted above, banks frequently grant refunds of assessed fees such 
as for occasional or inadvertent use of overdraft protection, which a 
consumer might also not be aware of at the time of opening the 
account. Again, the bank may have greater knowledge of its willing-
ness to waive overdraft fees in the future than the consumer at the 
time of opening the account. More specifi cally, the bank refunded 
assessed overdraft fees in 63% of cases in which consumers requested 
a refund. 
 44. G. Michael Flores and Todd J. Zywicki, “Commentary: CFPB Study 
of Overdraft Programs,”  George Mason Law & Economics Research 
Paper 13–60 (2013). 
 45. Todd J. Zywicki, “The Economics and Regulation of Bank Overdraft 
Protection,”  Washington and Lee Law Review 69 (2012): 1141. 
 46. Mark Greene, “Play by the Rules of the CFPB Is Coming for You,” 
 Forbes.com 
(2015): 
 http://www.forbes.com/sites/markgreene/
2015/01/30/play-by-the-rules-or-the-cfpb-is-coming-for-you/ 
 47. Oliver E. Williamson, “Credible Commitments: Using Hostages to 
Support Exchange,”  The American Economic Review (1983): 519–540. 
 48. See Todd Zywicki, “The Behavioral Law and Economics of Fixed-
Rate Mortgages (and Other Just-So Stories),”  Supreme Court 
Economic Review 21(1) (2013): 157–214. 
 49. Any effects from the policy were short term and transitional, of 
course, as the tax benefi t from home ownership eventually became 
capitalized into the relative prices of owning and renting housing, so 
the long-term impact on home ownership was negligible. In fact, 
equilibrium home ownership rates in the USA do not differ signifi -
cantly from those in similar countries elsewhere in the world. 
NUDGING IN AN EVOLVING MARKETPLACE 249
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 50. Michael Lea and Anthony B. Sanders, “Government Policy and the 
Fixed-Rate Mortgage,”  Annual Review of Financial Economics 3(1) 
(2011): 223–234. 
 51. Todd Zywicki, “The Behavioral Law and Economics of Fixed-Rate 
Mortgages (and Other Just-So Stories),”  Supreme Court Economic 
Review 21(1) (2013): 157–214. 
 52. Todd Zywicki, “The Behavioral Law and Economics of Fixed-Rate 
Mortgages (and Other Just-So Stories),”  Supreme Court Economic 
Review 21(1) (2013): 157–214. 
 53.  See Arthur Baines, Marsha Courchane, and Steli Stoianovici, “Economic 
Impact on Small Lenders of the Payday Lending Rules Under 
Consideration by the CFPB ” (Prepared for: Community Financial 
Services Association of America Prepared by Charles River Associates), 
available at  http://www.crai.com/sites/default/fi les/publications/
Economic-Impact-on-Small-Lenders-of-the-Payday-Lending-Rules-
under-Consideration-by-the-CFPB.pdf (May 12, 2015). 
 54. Ronald Mann, “Assessing the Optimism of Payday Loan Borrowers,” 
 Supreme Court Economic Review 21(1) (2013): 105–132. 
 55. Gregory Elliehausen, An Analysis of Consumers’ Use of Payday Loans 
43 (Fin. Servs. Research Program, Monograph No. 41, 2009), available 
at  http://www.cfsaa.com/portals/0/RelatedContent/Attachments/
GWUAnalysis_01-2009.pdf 
 56. Robert L. Clarke and Todd J. Zywicki, “Payday Lending, Bank 
Overdraft Protection, and Fair Competition at the Consumer 
Financial Protection Bureau,”  Review of Banking & Financial Law 
33(1) (2013): 235–281. 
 57. Todd J. Zywicki, “The Economics and Regulation of Bank Overdraft 
Protection,”  Washington and Lee Law Review 69 (2012): 1141. 
 58. Oren Bar-Gill and Ryan Bubb, “Credit Card Pricing: The CARD Act 
and Beyond,”  Cornell Law Review 97 (2012): 967; Sumit Agarwal, 
Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel, 
“ Regulating Consumer Financial Products :  Evidence from Credit 
Cards ,”  Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (2014): 111–64. 
 59.  See Durkin, Elliehausen, and Zywicki,  supra note 31. 
 60. Cass R. Sunstein, “Nudging: A Very Short Guide,”  Journal of 
Consumer Policy 37(4) (2014): 583–588. 
 61. Tom Baker and Peter Siegelman, “‘You Want Insurance with That?’ 
Using Behavioral Economics to Protect Consumers from Add-on 
Insurance Products.”  Connecticut Insurance Law Journal 20 (2013): 
13–1. 
250 
A.C. SMITH AND T.J. ZYWICKI
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

251
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_10
 One Standard to Rule Them All: 
The Disparate Impact of Energy Effi ciency 
Regulations 
 Sofi e   E.   Miller and  Brian   F.   Mannix 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Regulations establishing energy effi ciency and fuel economy standards 
are intended to conserve energy by getting consumers to choose more 
energy-effi cient products. Federal regulations restrict how much energy 
dozens of everyday products can use, for everything from the car you drive 
to the microwave in your house. While these rules impose signifi cant costs 
on consumers—especially low-income consumers—the benefi ts are harder 
to identify. 
 Agencies claim that restricting consumers’ choices provides consumers 
with enormous net benefi ts, but this reasoning is hard to reconcile with 
the fact that consumers have many legitimate reasons to have heteroge-
neous preferences for the appliances they buy and the cars they drive. 
In addition to disregarding consumer preferences, these rules may not 
conserve as much energy as advertised due to unintended behavioral con-
sequences. This chapter explores the reasoning behind energy effi ciency 
 S. E.  Miller () •  B. F.  Mannix 
 The George Washington University Regulatory Studies Center,  Washington , 
 DC ,  USA  
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

regulations and why these reasons are insuffi cient support for the large 
costs they impose on consumers, especially low-income consumers. 
 THE BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
 Regulations establishing energy effi ciency standards provide useful case 
studies of the application of behavioral economics insights to set policy. In 
the past decade especially, federal regulators have cited behavioral econom-
ics and “consumer irrationality” to justify standards that limit the amount 
of fuel, electricity, and water that vehicles and appliances can use. 1 , 2 In 
2014, federal regulations setting energy effi ciency standards accounted for 
$153 billion in claimed regulatory benefi ts. 3 Because they comprise such 
a large proportion of overall regulatory benefi ts—and because they affect 
all households—these rules merit a closer look. 
 Household energy consumption is closely linked to behavior, so that 
energy consumption might be reduced either through technological man-
dates that set energy consumption maximums for appliances, or through 
changes in the behavior of energy-consuming individuals. Despite this 
interplay, federal policies intended to reduce energy consumption rely 
almost entirely on technological mandates to do so. 4 The role of behavior 
in energy consumption is pervasive, so behavioral economics should pro-
vide insights for reducing consumption. 
 First, this chapter examines the policy tools used by regulators to reduce 
energy consumption. While many government regulations are concerned 
with reducing energy consumption, this chapter will focus in particular 
on energy effi ciency standards promulgated by the Department of Energy 
(DOE) and fuel effi ciency standards promulgated by the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) in conjunction with the Department of 
Transportation (DOT). In both of these cases, instead of presenting con-
sumers with the information to make the best possible choice, regulators 
ban a subset of products from the marketplace. While this strategy has the 
potential to reduce energy consumption, it may also pose large costs to 
consumers in the form of lost consumer surplus. 
 In contrast, some private companies have developed technologies that 
are designed to change the behavior of energy consumers. Unlike the 
approaches used by regulators, private behavioral technologies attempt to 
cause changes in consumer behavior by providing timely information and 
252 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

tools to improve energy use. While these technologies may in some ways 
pose an alternative to regulating energy effi ciency, some federal and state 
regulatory programs are beginning to blur the lines between public and 
private nudges, making it diffi cult to clearly delineate between the two. 
 REGULATING ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
 The Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 (EPCA) authorizes 
the DOE to establish energy conservation standards for consumer appli-
ances that are both technologically feasible and economically justifi ed, 
while also resulting in a “signifi cant conservation of energy.” 5 EPCA 
requires DOE to establish energy and water effi ciency standards for 20 
different categories of covered consumer products, including refrigera-
tors, freezers, furnaces, dishwashers, clothes dryers, televisions, faucets, 
and lamps. 6 
 In addition to this wide range of covered appliances, EPCA also gives 
DOE the authority to establish energy conservation standards for “Any 
other type of consumer product which the Secretary classifi es as a covered 
product under subsection (b).” 7 This subsection of the Act allows the 
Secretary broad discretion in classifying consumer products as a “covered 
product” if she determines that:
 (A) classifying products of such type as covered products is necessary or 
appropriate to carry out the purposes of this Act, and 
 (B) average annual per-household energy use by products of such type is 
likely to exceed 100 kilowatt-hours (or its Btu equivalent) per year. 8 
 Since energy use is a function of water use in many appliances (e.g., 
clothes or dish washers), the statute gives the Department authority to 
regulate energy and water usage of a wide swath of products used every 
day in nearly every American household. 
 The EPCA also delegates authority to DOE to establish energy conser-
vation standards for 12 classes of commercial appliances, including com-
mercial ice machines, air conditioners, heating equipment, walk- in coolers 
and freezers, and commercial clothes washers. 9 Beyond these explicitly 
covered products, DOE also has authority to regulate “Any other type of 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 253
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

industrial equipment which the Secretary classifi es as covered equipment 
under section 341(b).” 
 The number of energy effi ciency standards promulgated by the federal 
government has increased rapidly since passage of the Energy Independence 
and Security Act of 2007 (EISA), which amended the EPCA to increase 
Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards and effi ciency 
 standards for energy-using durables. The semiannual Unifi ed Agenda, 
published by the Offi ce of Management and Budget (OMB), lists ongo-
ing and upcoming regulations planned by agencies for the year ahead. 
The Spring 2016 Unifi ed Agenda listed 3 energy effi ciency standards from 
DOE in the prerule stage, 12 standards in the proposed rule stage, and 
13 in the fi nal rule stage, 10 indicating that federal regulators do not plan to 
slow the promulgation of energy effi ciency rules any time soon. 
 Energy Effi ciency Standards for Residential Appliances 
 DOE has recently fi nalized energy conservation standards for residential 
dishwashers, 11 microwaves, 12 clothes washers, 13 furnaces, and air condi-
tioners, 14 appliances that most households rely on for everyday tasks. Each 
of these regulations increases the price of appliances in return for reducing 
long-term energy usage and energy bills. 15 These standards affect nearly 
all American households, so it is important to examine the rationale that 
regulators use to promulgate them. 
 Government regulation is primarily intended to correct market fail-
ures, 16 and Executive Order 12866 requires executive branch agencies to 
identify the problem that they are attempting to solve via regulation. The 
language of E.O. 12866 clearly indicates that an agency should not pro-
mulgate a regulation that is not made necessary by a failure of the private 
market or other compelling public need unless it is statutorily required. 17 
The types of market failure that typically are used to justify government 
intervention fall into one of the following categories: externalities, monop-
oly power, and asymmetric information. 
 As directed by E.O. 12866, DOE identifi es three problems that its 
rules are intended to address: externalities from carbon dioxide emissions 
as a result of ineffi cient appliances, asymmetric information about the 
potential savings yielded by effi cient appliances, and a lack of consumer 
information/processing capability about energy effi ciency. 18 DOE’s claim 
is that two types of market failure could potentially be addressed by set-
ting energy effi ciency standards for commercial and residential equipment. 
254 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 First, energy used to power appliances results in some greenhouse gas 
emissions. Because the social cost of greenhouse gas emissions may not be 
fully represented in the price of energy, these emissions are externalities 
which regulatory policies could address. Second, consumers are currently 
purchasing appliances with higher long-term energy costs, which may indi-
cate that they do not have suffi cient information about the energy cost 
savings that higher-effi ciency products make possible. This asymmetric 
information, if it exists, could be remedied by improved labeling or other 
types of consumer education campaigns. 
 While it doesn’t fall into the category of a traditional market failure, the 
Department also intends for its rules to address a third problem: consum-
ers’ lack of “information processing capability.” 19 It is clear from the text 
of DOE’s rules that the Department believes consumers aren’t adequately 
equipped to trade off upfront price increases against long-term energy 
savings. Overcoming this presumed consumer cognitive failure is the pri-
mary focus of DOE’s energy conservation standards, rather than reducing 
information asymmetry or pollution externalities. 20 , 21 
 However, DOE’s energy effi ciency standards don’t ultimately address 
either of these market failures. The environmental benefi ts of these rules 
are so small relative to the private benefi ts, and relative to the upfront 
costs, that reduced externalities alone don’t justify the standards. 22 While 
reducing carbon emissions may be a worthwhile goal for regulation, these 
rules only tangentially reduce carbon emissions, and primarily focus on 
reduced energy expenditures by consumers. 23 
 In addition, these rules don’t address information asymmetry in the 
marketplace by promoting labeling requirements or other standards that 
could improve the quality of information available to consumers, even 
though EPCA grants the federal government broad authority to require 
labeling of energy-using products. 24 Despite this authority, and the rela-
tively low cost of implementing labeling requirements, regulators don’t 
rely heavily on labeling or other disclosures that would communicate 
potential energy savings to consumers. Instead, DOE rules ban prod-
ucts from the marketplace, which restricts choice rather than improving 
information. 
 The following sections explore how the Department justifi es its energy 
effi ciency standards, the massive regulatory benefi ts that DOE calculates 
as a result, and the assumptions on which those regulatory benefi ts are 
based. We fi nd that the assumptions that DOE uses to formulate its analy-
ses are not representative of the real-world tradeoffs faced by consumers, 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 255
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

and modeling techniques that better represent consumer preferences and 
tradeoffs instead suggest consumers will bear large net costs. 
 Regulatory Benefi ts 
 To justify most of its regulations, DOE relies almost entirely on one type 
of regulatory benefi t: the cost savings consumers are estimated to enjoy 
over the life of a more energy-effi cient appliance. For example, Miller fi nds 
that between 2007 and 2014 private benefi ts constituted 88 % of all ben-
efi ts from energy effi ciency standards. 25 Because this cost saving is a benefi t 
felt exclusively by the private consumer, rather than society at large, the 
benefi ts that justify DOE’s energy effi ciency rules are “private benefi ts” 
rather than public benefi ts. 
 This differentiates effi ciency rules from the majority of federal regula-
tions, which have historically relied on public benefi ts—such as reduced 
externalities—for justifi cation. However, the private benefi ts of DOE’s 
effi ciency rules dwarf the anticipated public benefi ts, such that most of 
these rules would not pass a benefi t-cost test if relying on externality ben-
efi ts alone. 26 
 In many cases, consumers already had the option to purchase more 
effi cient, higher-priced appliances prior to regulation, indicating that a 
lack of energy-effi cient appliances in the market is not the impetus for 
these standards. However, regulators draw on the behavioral economics 
literature to argue that consumers fail to purchase these high-effi ciency 
appliances due to inadequate information processing capability. In doing 
so, regulators overlook the possibility that consumers may have legitimate 
preferences for less-effi cient appliances based on household characteristics 
or other observable product qualities (such as size, durability, reliability, 
speed, or noise level). 27 By regulating away the option for consumers to 
purchase less-effi cient appliances, DOE is ostensibly improving consum-
ers’ choice structure by removing choices. 
 Instead of taking these revealed preferences as indications of legitimate 
consumer preferences, DOE argues that they reveal behavioral biases 
that could be resolved through regulation. In a recent fi nal rule estab-
lishing effi ciency standards for furnace fans, DOE provided a review of 
the behavioral economics literature on how consumers trade off upfront 
costs and long-term energy savings, which largely attempts to explain why 
consumers consistently “undervalue” improvements in energy effi ciency. 
DOE draws on this literature to conclude that consumers are unaware 
256 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

of potential savings, have insuffi cient savings to make effi ciency improve-
ments, place an excessive focus on the short term, or struggle with an 
inability to calculate long-term energy savings benefi ts. Without specifying 
which explanation it fi nds most compelling, DOE concludes that “This 
undervaluation suggests that regulation that promotes energy effi ciency 
can produce signifi cant net private gains (as well as producing social gains 
by, for example, reducing pollution).” 28 
 DOE presumes that its own valuation for energy effi ciency is the correct 
one and that consumers should make product choices based on energy sav-
ings as DOE projects and values them. The fact that consumers do not cur-
rently choose to buy effi cient appliances, instead of revealing consumers’ 
preferences for other product attributes, reveals to the Department only 
that consumers must undervalue effi ciency. However, effi ciency is just one 
attribute of an appliance, and consumers may be making a correct valuation 
if they are weighing increased effi ciency against other product attributes 
that they value more highly. 29 Ultimately, the Department cannot know 
enough about consumer households and constraints to be able to optimize 
consumer welfare across all of the considerations consumers ought to be 
able to take into account when making purchases of energy- using durables. 
 By eliminating the option to purchase low effi ciency appliances, DOE 
believes that its energy conservation standards create signifi cant private 
benefi ts. But this claim is diffi cult to reconcile with the standard economic 
defi nition of regulatory benefi ts: the surplus “willingness to pay” remain-
ing after the regulation’s winners fully compensate all of the losers. 30 How 
much is the average consumer willing to pay in order to be prohibited 
from buying, for example, an incandescent light bulb? After all, prior to the 
regulation, not buying the incandescent bulb is free. Why would anyone 
pay to have that choice imposed on them? 31 As one recent paper noted:
 How can it be that consumers are leaving billions of potential economic 
gains on the table by not buying the most energy-effi cient cars, clothes dry-
ers, air conditioners, and light bulbs? … If the savings are this great, why is it 
that a very basic informational approach cannot remedy this seemingly stun-
ning example of completely irrational behavior? It should be quite simple 
to rectify decisions that are this fl awed. Rather than accept the implications 
that consumers and fi rms are acting so starkly against their economic inter-
est, a more plausible explanation is that there is something incorrect in the 
assumptions being made in the regulatory impact analyses. 32 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 257
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 There are a number of reasons why the assumptions made by regulators 
do not accurately portray the tradeoffs faced by consumers. We expand on 
some of these problems in the sections below. 
 Consumer Heterogeneity 
 To justify its conclusion that consumers will be better served by a more 
limited array of product choices, regulators assume an unrealistic degree 
of consumer homogeneity when setting effi ciency standards. However, 
we know that this assumption is far from the truth: markets respond to 
consumer preferences, and products differ because consumer preferences 
differ. As Gayer and Viscusi observe:
 The principal impetus for respecting consumer decisions can be traced to 
the fundamental role of heterogeneity in undermining the desirability of 
mandating uniformity. Differences in preferences and income generate dif-
ferent consumer demand for products. Even for products all consumers 
might fi nd attractive, there will be differences in preferences; some consum-
ers are willing to pay more for the product than others, giving rise to the 
usual downward-sloping demand for the product. 33 
 People are infl uenced by a number of factors when they make an appli-
ance purchase, not just energy effi ciency. For example, consumers in Maine 
are more likely to buy effi cient furnaces, but not air conditioners, while 
consumers in Texas are more likely to do the reverse. 34 This is, in fact, the 
 economically effi cient outcome. Valuing one product attribute (e.g., price, 
size, reliability) over another (e.g., energy effi ciency) does not indicate 
information processing defi ciencies, it just reinforces that consumers have 
heterogeneous preferences due to location, climate, household size, and 
income, among other reasons. 
 Moreover, a furnace or water heater in a beach house may be used 
rarely; a window air conditioner in the guest room may be used only a tiny 
fraction of the time that the one in the master bedroom is used. 35 While the 
same consumer will adapt her or his choices to particular locations and cir-
cumstances, regulators do not take the same approach. Because regulators 
cannot access, let alone process, all of this relevant information, one-size- 
fi ts-all technological mandates lead to lost consumer surplus by reducing 
the ability of consumers to optimize their choices in the marketplace. 
 A recent example of one-size-fi ts-all standards gone awry is the 
Department’s furnace effi ciency rule, which mandates that 30 northern 
258 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

states use furnaces with 90 % effi ciency or greater. However, these high- 
effi ciency furnaces require a vent to outside air, making them diffi cult (and 
costly) to install in households with a furnace located in interior rooms—
such as townhouses and condominiums. 36 In this case, it’s reasonable to 
assume that these households didn’t use high effi ciency appliances because 
they didn’t fi t, not that households were acting irrationally against their 
own long-term interests. By requiring use of a furnace that did not fi t 
actual household space constraints, DOE illustrates its inability to make 
better decisions for consumers than they could make for themselves. 
 In its fi nal rules for residential appliances, DOE briefl y mentions the con-
cept of heterogeneous consumer preferences. However, the Department 
does not account for this variation in its analyses of energy effi ciency rules:
 DOE’s current analysis does not explicitly control for heterogeneity in con-
sumer preferences, preferences across subcategories of products or specifi c 
features, or consumer price sensitivity variation according to household 
income. 37 
 Failure to account for diverse consumer preferences and constraints 
misrepresents the true effects of energy effi ciency standards, and results in 
analyses showing consistently high net benefi ts from effi ciency rules that 
do not refl ect actual household experience. Consumer preferences and 
household characteristics vary in a number of ways that determine whether 
investing in energy-effi cient equipment is cost-benefi cial. Ignoring this 
basic truth results in one-size-fi ts-all standards that reduce choices and 
consumer welfare. 
 Heterogeneous Time Preferences 
 Because consumers receive the benefi t of reduced energy or water bills 
over the entire estimated lifetimes of their appliances, DOE must discount 
these benefi ts to make them comparable with the upfront costs resulting 
from the standards. Benefi ts expected in the future are diminished in this 
calculation because people generally prefer present consumption to future 
consumption; that is, they have positive time preferences. 38 Discounting 
benefi ts and costs allows comparison between values occurring in different 
time periods by converting values to a common unit of measurement. 39 
In its analyses, DOE compares discounted benefi ts to discounted costs to 
calculate the net present value of its standards. 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 259
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 A very low discount rate implies that present consumption is not val-
ued much more than future consumption, whereas a very high discount 
rate implies that future consumption has little value relative to present 
consumption. The appropriate rate by which to discount future benefi ts is 
not certain, and assuming a discount rate that is too high or too low can 
mischaracterize consumption preferences over time. This further compli-
cates the calculation because a rule’s future expected costs and benefi ts can 
vary dramatically depending on the discount rate used to compare them to 
present costs and benefi ts. Using an inaccurate discount rate could jeopar-
dize the economic justifi cation of DOE’s energy conservation standards. 
 Furthermore, consumer time preferences are far from homogenous 
and can differ to such an extent that DOE’s analyses may not refl ect 
actual household effects. For example, a recent working paper from the 
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) fi nds that different con-
sumer groups have vastly different discount rates for purchases of energy- 
effi cient appliances. Richard Newell and Juha Siikamäki fi nd that race, 
education, and other household characteristics can signifi cantly infl uence 
consumer discount rates. This is crucial because “the profi tability of EE 
[energy effi cient] investments depends fundamentally on the rate at which 
individuals discount future energy savings relative to the required upfront 
investment.” 40 
 In Circular A-94, the OMB recommends that agencies use default real 
discount rates of 3 % and 7 % when measuring the benefi ts of public invest-
ments and regulations. These discount rates approximate the “social rate 
of time preference” and the opportunity cost of capital, 41 respectively. 
 When benefi ts for DOE’s effi ciency rules are discounted at 3 % and 7 %, 
its rules result in large net private benefi ts for consumers. For example, 
using discount rates of 3 % and 7 % puts the annualized benefi ts of its 
recent furnace fans rule at $2.17 billion and $1.45 billion, respectively, 
a range of $720 million. This large range indicates that the discount rate 
used in DOE’s assessment is critically important in calculating the antici-
pated benefi ts of the regulation and in determining whether the regula-
tion is economically justifi ed, as required by the statute. 42 
 OMB’s guidance on discounting may be appropriate when evaluating 
government expenditures, where the typical practice is to use a low, risk- 
free, discount rate because no single expenditure is likely to be more than a 
small part of the government’s budget. But this is not true of automobiles 
and appliances purchased by consumers, who have budget constraints and 
an aversion to risks, and thus, experience real costs that do not get cap-
260 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

tured by an artifi cially low discount rate. 43 , 44 Consumers’ actual discount 
rates are not homogenous, either across the population or across purchase 
types, and the estimate of a regulation’s benefi ts is reduced when using 
actual consumer discount rates for home appliance purchases. 
 Many studies of implicit consumer discount rates use the purchase of 
energy-using durables (such as air conditioners, dishwashers, and refriger-
ators) to measure consumer time preferences. This is because these appli-
ances have upfront costs that can potentially be offset by long-term energy 
savings, 45 and there are often many available options with varying costs 
and levels of energy effi ciency among which consumers may choose. 
 Based on fi eld studies in the literature, Frederick et al. fi nd implicit dis-
count rates of between 17 % and 300 % for energy-using durables. 46 The 
variance is so wide that DOE’s use (and OMB’s recommendation) of 3 % 
and 7 % seems to be an inaccurate measure of actual consumer benefi ts from 
energy effi ciency standards. The advantage of using fi eld studies to mea-
sure discount rates is that they examine actual marketplace behavior and are 
therefore more applicable to consumer behavior for energy-using durables. 
 This is in contrast to OMB’s approach, which uses the real rate of 
return on long-term government debt, such as ten-year Treasury notes, 
to approximate consumer discount rates. While a ten-year Treasury note’s 
interest rate is useful for analysis, it is not directly useful for understanding 
the tradeoffs that consumers make when purchasing durable energy-using 
goods. In their regression analysis, Newell and Siikamäki fi nd that
 individual discount rates exhibit considerable heterogeneity and system-
atically infl uence household willingness to pay (WTP) for EE [energy effi -
ciency], as measured through product choices, required payback periods, 
and EE tax credit claims. The relationship is statistically signifi cant, empiri-
cally robust, and not confounded by the characteristics of the homeowner, 
household, and their home. 47 
 DOE tallies the benefi ts of its energy effi ciency standards by treating 
consumers as a homogenous group, but this doesn’t refl ect reality. If con-
sumers don’t value the appliance attributes that DOE is mandating, these 
rules impose huge net costs on consumers rather than benefi ts. Using a 
low discount rate to set standards effectively forces consumers to accept 
a very low rate of return on their investments in appliances and vehicles. 
 There are a number of reasons why reasonable consumers might use 
discount rates higher than those assumed by DOE. Capital markets are 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 261
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

not completely frictionless, and so it is not realistic to assume that every-
one is able to borrow and lend until their discount rates come into equi-
librium. Low-income consumers, in particular, are likely to have a higher 
discount rate that accurately refl ects their opportunity cost for capital. 48 
For example, average interest rates on consumer credit cards are closer to 
15 % than the 3 % return on a Treasury bill. 
 Moreover, the returns on energy effi ciency investments may be 
extremely risky (due, e.g., to the variability of gasoline prices in recent 
years); so a risk-free discount rate is inappropriate for risk-averse consum-
ers. Many consumers, for a variety of reasons, may be in a position to 
earn much higher returns on other investments—such as education, or 
even meals, for their children. It is not a benefi t to deprive them of those 
superior investments. 
 Distributional Effects 
 But consumer discount rates don’t just vary widely: they also correlate 
with other household characteristics, such as income, education, and 
race. 49 For example, high-income households are more likely to use low 
implicit discount rates, because they have more certain future streams of 
income and can afford to make higher-priced upfront investments. Low- 
income households, on the other hand, do not benefi t from the same 
certainty and are more likely to have much higher discount rates. This 
disparity means that “a result of [energy effi ciency] standards is to place an 
implicit tax on those individuals who are thought to have the highest dis-
count rates: the less well off. Thus effi ciency standards can have an adverse 
income distribution effect.” 50 
 As Hausman observes in his early fi eld study of implicit consumer 
discount rates, the only individuals with actual discount rates that are 
approximate to the prevailing interest rates in credit markets are high- 
income households. This implies that only high-income households are 
adequately represented by the discount rates DOE uses to calculate the 
benefi ts of energy effi ciency standards. Even median-income US house-
holds have signifi cantly higher discount rates of 27 % for the purchase of 
energy-using durables. 51 
 Other studies relying on elicitation and experiments also fi nd higher 
median individual discount rates. For example, Andersen et al fi nd that 
individual discount rates have a mean of 25.3 % and a median of 18.7 %, 
with a standard deviation of 14.1  %. 52 These rates are similar to those 
found by Harrison et al, who estimate mean and median discount rates 
262 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

of 24.2 % and 24.5 %, respectively, and a standard deviation of 15.7 %. 53 
While these studies determine general discount rates rather than rates 
used by individuals purchasing energy-using durables, they still serve to 
 reinforce that individuals have differing time preferences and that typical 
discount rates are much higher than those used in DOE’s analysis. 
 Recent research by Miller fi nds that DOE’s effi ciency rule for fur-
nace fans results in large net costs for consumers with discount rates 
higher than 12 %, which is most consumers. 54 These costs are especially 
high for low-income households and individuals with high discount 
rates, indicating that DOE’s effi ciency standards are highly regres-
sive, burdening low- income households with net costs rather than net 
benefi ts. 55 
 Energy Effi ciency Standards for Commercial Appliances 
 DOE also issues energy conservation standards for commercial appliances, 
such as walk-in coolers and freezers, air conditioners, and commercial 
refrigerators. According to DOE, the energy conservation program covers 
more than 60 products, representing 60 % of commercial building energy 
use, and approximately 30 % of industrial energy use. 56 
 Despite the fact that commercial entities are profi t-motivated and have 
access to more resources for planning upfront capital costs and long-term 
savings than households, DOE applies the same logic to commercial appli-
ances as it does to residential appliances. DOE does not seem fazed by 
the logical diffi culties of applying shortcomings in consumer processing 
capabilities to commercial entities. Interestingly enough, following this 
logic implies that federal employees are somehow mysteriously better than 
private businesses at making business investment decisions. 
 In 2013, DOE proposed a rule establishing energy effi ciency stan-
dards for commercial refrigerators. DOE noted that while its analysis 
predicted large fi nancial benefi ts from higher-effi ciency standards, users 
of commercial refrigeration were not already demanding the production 
of high-effi ciency equipment. Instead of evaluating whether its model-
ing assumptions accurately refl ected real world conditions and tradeoffs, 
DOE relied on several theories as to why commercial customer prefer-
ences might be incorrect (without distinguishing the large, repeat pur-
chases of profi t-motivated commercial entities from individual household 
decisions). 57 However, because commercial entities are primarily profi t- 
motivated, have access to greater information, and can forecast future 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 263
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

costs with greater precision than households, it is diffi cult to explain how 
DOE can defend applying the same behavioral economics arguments to 
commercial actors as it does to residential consumers. 
 Particularly in these cases, where the “consumers” in question are 
cost-conscious purchasers of commercial equipment, DOE should con-
sider alternative explanations for the difference between its estimates of 
costs and savings and the revealed calculations of purchasers. Rather than 
assuming the equipment purchasers are wrong, DOE should consider the 
alternative hypothesis that its analysis does not refl ect real world condi-
tions and tradeoffs. 58 
 For example, DOE discounts future energy savings at a discount rate of 
3 % for its primary benefi t estimates, whereas the cost of equity for private 
fi rms is much higher. New York University’s Stern School of Business esti-
mates that the cost of capital for restaurants is 8.48 %, nearly three times 
the discount rate of future energy savings used by DOE. NYU Stern puts 
Wal-Mart’s cost of capital at above 7 %, more than twice the rate used in 
DOE’s calculation. This difference between the discount rate DOE uses 
and the rates fi rms actually face appears to be a more likely explanation for 
the difference in how DOE and commercial purchasers of refrigeration 
equipment value future energy savings than DOE’s explanation that pur-
chasers lack “information,”“suffi cient salience of the long-term or aggre-
gate benefi ts,” or the proper “incentives.” 59 
 DOE’s analyses do not seem to consider that commercial customers 
may value attributes other than energy effi ciency when making equip-
ment purchases. Commercial customers have vast amounts of informa-
tion, unavailable to DOE, that is relevant to their investment decisions; 
yet it is diffi cult to think of any bit of information that DOE might pos-
sess that is not also readily available to the businesses. Despite the fact 
that cost- conscious commercial consumers are not demanding access to 
higher- effi ciency appliances, DOE implausibly concludes that reducing 
commercial consumers’ options will make them better off. 
 Fuel Economy Standards 
 The EPCA of 1975, as amended by the EISA, authorizes DOT to issue 
fuel economy standards for passenger vehicles and trucks. The DOT issues 
CAFE standards in conjunction with the EPA, pursuant to its authority 
under the Clean Air Act. According to DOT:
264 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 The CAFE standards are fl eet-wide averages that must be achieved by each 
automaker for its car and truck fl eet, each year, since 1978. When these stan-
dards are raised, automakers respond by creating a more fuel-effi cient fl eet, 
which improves our nation’s energy security and saves consumers money at 
the pump, while also reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. 60 
 In its most recent iteration of the CAFE standards, EPA estimated that 
total fuel savings for consumers comprised about 79 % of the rule’s total 
anticipated benefi ts. 61 In the text of their rule, the agencies explain that, 
while the standards will increase the price of a new vehicle by $1,800 on 
average, consumers who drive the vehicle for its entire lifetime will recoup 
a net savings of between $3,400 and $5,000. 62 
 However, consumers already have the option not to buy the less fuel- 
effi cient car (although certainly not all consumers exercise that option). To 
reiterate the question asked previously in this chapter, how much are consum-
ers willing to pay to be prohibited from buying the vehicle that they prefer? 63 
 Behavioral Arguments 
 EPA and DOT make the foundation of their reasoning explicit: the only 
reason that consumers buy less effi cient vehicles is due to insuffi cient rea-
soning capacity to understand the value of high-effi ciency vehicles. The 
agencies posit that consumers might be myopic, may lack suffi cient infor-
mation about future fuel savings, or may lack the ability to process infor-
mation about future fuel savings. 64 
 In their fi nal rule setting CAFE standards for light-duty vehicles, EPA 
and DOT draw on the behavioral economics literature to explain why 
consumers may not adequately value long-term fuel savings. 65 In doing so, 
the agencies question whether consumers internalize the potential private 
benefi ts of fuel-effi cient vehicles when making purchasing decisions. 66 
 Other potential sources of market failure include phenomena highlighted by 
the fi eld of behavioral economics, including loss aversion, inadequate con-
sumer attention to long-term effects of their decisions, or a lack of salience 
of benefi ts such as fuel savings to consumers at the time they make purchas-
ing decisions. 67 
 However, as we examine in the next section, the agencies do not 
explore the possibility that consumers may prefer other vehicle attributes 
over fuel economy. This omission leads the agencies to conclude that fail-
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 265
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

ure to make purchase decisions based on the agencies’ own valuation of 
fuel economy indicates consumers’ inability to rationally choose an opti-
mal product. 
 Another potential argument to justify CAFE standards is not that con-
sumers don’t understand the value of fuel economy, but they aren’t able to 
accurately predict gas prices. 68 This uncertainty would lead consumers to 
undervalue the potential savings available through increased fuel effi ciency. 
In his 1985 piece in  Regulation Magazine , David R. Henderson notes:
 The problem [with this argument] is, no one can predict future gaso-
line prices accurately; consumers, in fact, do as well as or better than 
the government experts. Based on prices of used cars, Daly and Mayor 
found, for example, that consumers expected real gasoline prices to 
fall after 1980. The Department of Energy (DOE) on the other hand, 
together with most energy experts, predicted in 1980 that the real price 
of unleaded gasoline would reach about $1.80 a gallon in 1984 (in 
[1985] dollars). Consumers—not the experts—were right; DOE was off 
by a staggering 34 %. 69 
 After all, Henderson remarks, consumers themselves make millions of 
purchase decisions every year, which gives them the opportunity to adjust 
their actions to new information if market conditions (such as fuel prices) 
change. Government, on the other hand, is much less fl exible. In fact, by 
establishing fuel economy standards that do not respond to changes in the 
price of gasoline, “CAFE is a case in point” of failure to adjust policy to 
actual marketplace conditions. 70 
 Consumer Preferences: One Size Fits All? 
 Importantly, the agencies also list among these cognitive shortcomings 
that consumers “may consider fuel economy after other vehicle attributes 
and, as such, not optimize the level of this attribute.” 71 That is, consumers 
err by giving more weight to product attributes other than fuel economy. 
 According to the agencies’ reasoning, fuel economy should not be sub-
ordinated to other product attributes that consumers consider in the car 
and light truck market. Failure to make purchase decisions based on the 
agencies’ own valuation of fuel economy indicates consumers’ inability 
to rationally choose an optimal product. In their fi nal rule setting CAFE 
standards for light-duty vehicles, EPA and DOT contend that “Even if 
consumers have relevant knowledge, selecting a vehicle is a highly com-
plex undertaking, involving many vehicle characteristics. In the face of 
266 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

such a complicated choice, consumers may use simplifi ed decision rules.” 72 
The agencies seem not to recognize that they themselves, rather than con-
sumers, are guilty of using limited information and of oversimplifying a 
complex purchase decision. 
 It should be no surprise that the agencies’ myopia harms consumers:
 Consumer harm is a central consideration in the analysis of CAFE stan-
dards. Cars have many attributes that consumers care about, including 
mileage, price, safety, reliability, performance, and so forth. By constraining 
the corporate average mpg, CAFE standards “put a thumb on the scale,” 
tipping the balance more in favor of mileage and away from other desir-
able attributes. In order to comply with the CAFE standards, manufacturers 
must redesign their product line, and must price cars so that consumers will 
buy a mix that meets the required standard. The result is that consumers are 
worse off. That is the tradeoff the government makes for pursuing gasoline 
savings beyond the point that consumers want to pursue it. 73 
 The agencies’ approach treats diverse preferences as a problem to be 
fi xed, rather than a fact of the marketplace. After all, no one can know a 
household’s own characteristics and constraints better than the household 
itself, although DOT and EPA may disagree. So long as agencies treat 
consumers’ preferences for other attributes as illegitimate, consumers bear 
the costs in the form of higher prices and fewer choices. 74 
 Behavioral Consequences 
 While fuel economy and appliance effi ciency standards set technological 
mandates for energy use, they don’t address the other driver of energy con-
sumption: behavior. As it turns out, effi ciency standards change behavior in 
a number of ways that can counteract the intended purposes of these rules. 
 A prime example of how technological mandates change behavior is 
the rebound effect, which describes how consumers increase product 
usage as their energy costs decrease. Counterintuitively, an effect of EPA 
and DOE’s effi ciency standards may be increased energy use, because it 
becomes cheaper to drive one more mile or run the dishwasher one more 
time. 75 The extent of a rebound effect can be measured by using elasticity 
of demand, which quantifi es in percent terms how much demand for (or 
in this case, usage of) a product increases with each 1 % decrease in price. 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 267
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 In 1980, the Regulatory Analysis Review Group (RARG) within the 
Council of Wage and Price Stability issued a report on DOE’s proposed 
energy effi ciency standards for appliances, which found that:
 effi ciency standards for appliances with a high usage elasticity will tend to 
be ineffective in saving energy. If this elasticity is as great as −1, any increase 
in the effi ciency of individual appliances will be offset by an equal increase 
in usage. If it is more elastic, effi ciency standards will actually cause total 
energy consumption of individual appliances to increase: Thus the assump-
tion of constant usage could obscure a very serious fl aw in the proposed 
standards. 76 
 RARG concluded that increases in appliance effi ciency will lead to pro-
portional reductions in energy consumption only if demand for services is 
completely inelastic and will lead to increased total energy consumption 
if usage elasticity is more elastic than −1. 77 In this way, rational consumer 
behavior in response to regulation could partially counter the intended 
effects of energy effi ciency rules. 78 , 79 
 While RARG used rebound effect as an argument against energy effi -
ciency standards, others have argued that the rebound effect is actually “a 
measure of the benefi t of appliance standards to the consumer.” 80 Though 
DOE generally doesn’t account for rebound effects when estimating the 
costs and benefi t of its appliance effi ciency rules, EPA and DOT do count 
additional rebound-effect driving as a benefi t of their CAFE standards, 81 
which they calculate using an elasticity of 10 %. 82 However, EPA and DOT 
also note that the effect of their standards on emissions is dependent on 
the size of the accompanying rebound effect, concluding that “the net 
effect of stricter CAFE standards on emissions of each pollutant depends 
on the relative magnitudes of its reduced emissions in fuel refi ning and 
distribution, and increases in its emissions from vehicle use.” 83 
 However, if people’s product usage is more sensitive to price than the 
agencies assume, effi ciency standards will be less successful than expected. For 
example, the agencies admit that the elasticity used above “is on the low end 
of the range reported in previous research,” 84 which fi nds elasticities as high as 
75 % and with a median around 23 %. 85 Although the studies examined by the 
agencies fi nd a wide range of estimates, they “generally conclude that a sig-
nifi cant rebound effect occurs when the cost per mile of driving decreases.” 86 
In a comprehensive estimate of the rebound effect for all domestic household 
268 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

vehicles, Greene et al. fi nd a rebound effect of about 20 %, based on the 
Residential Transportation Energy Consumption Surveys. 87 
 The rebound effect is not limited to vehicles: some research has quan-
tifi ed the rebound effect for household appliances, as well. For example, 
Fouquet and Pearson use vector error-correction models to estimate a 
long-run uncompensated demand elasticity for lighting of −0.6 (or 
60 %). 88 While it appears that “backfi re”—or, rebound large enough to 
offset 100 % of effi ciency savings—is unlikely, rebound for fuel economy 
and household appliances “is a substantial factor which, if ignored, would 
lead to signifi cant overstatement of energy savings.” 89 If this is the case, 
then the rebound effect from these fuel-economy rules will partly erase the 
gain in fuel savings, carbon emissions, and emissions of other pollutants. 
 Another unintended result from increased effi ciency could be delays 
in market penetration for effi cient products. If new, effi cient products 
have higher prices and fewer desirable attributes, consumers may delay 
new vehicle and appliance purchases longer than they otherwise would 
have. 90 , 91 For example, a family with a less-effi cient 15-year-old minivan 
may choose to keep the van for longer than they otherwise would rather 
than buy a new, more effi cient vehicle. They may make this decision 
because the price of new vans with similar features has increased—along 
with their fuel effi ciency—or because they prefer the attributes of their old 
van, and can’t fi nd similar features in new, fuel-effi cient models. Either 
way, the result is that fuel-ineffi cient models are on the road for longer, 
postponing the savings in carbon emissions that the agencies envisioned 
when fi nalizing their regulations. 92 , 93 
 Another unfortunate effect of fuel economy standards is increased risk 
for car occupants. As CAFE standards have increased, companies have 
been incentivized to make smaller, lighter cars in order to reach overall 
fl eet fuel economy standards. These smaller, lighter cars provide less pro-
tection for passengers, increasing both risk and fatalities. 94 
 The agencies are cognizant of this unintended consequence. In the 
preamble of their 2012 fi nal CAFE rule, EPA and DOT devoted a sig-
nifi cant amount a space to safety concerns 95 and will continue to monitor 
the effects of fuel economy standards on societal fatalities. 96 However, 
EPA and DOT are unable to provide exact estimates of the fatality effects 
because there are multiple options available to manufacturers for meet-
ing the CAFE standards, and the agencies cannot foresee to what extent 
manufacturers will rely on reduced vehicle size and weight versus other 
options. 97 Beginning in 2011, the CAFE standards have incorporated a 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 269
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

“footprint” adjustment that accounts for vehicle size. While this may help 
reduce the degree to which manufacturers rely on vehicle downsizing to 
meet the standards, it is likely to encourage tradeoffs in other attributes of 
the vehicle, with additional unintended consequences. 
 In 2011, Jacobsen used a fi xed effects model to measure the effects 
of vehicle class, engineering risk, and exposure on fatal accidents to fi nd 
that each incremental increase in the CAFE mpg requirements results in 
an additional 150 annual fatalities. 98 An earlier report from the National 
Research Council relying on engineering studies of vehicle weight found 
that the CAFE standards in 2002 were responsible for 2,000 additional 
fatalities annually. 99 Using the prevailing value of statistical life used by the 
DOT, these additional fatalities add up to approximately $18 billion in 
annual costs from lives lost. 100 
 BEHAVIORAL TECHNOLOGIES 
 As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, energy consumption can 
be reduced either through technological mandates that set energy con-
sumption maximums for appliances or through changing the behaviors of 
energy-consuming individuals. Despite this interplay, policies intended to 
reduce energy consumption—such as the CAFE standards and appliance 
effi ciency standards—rely almost entirely on technological mandates to 
do so. 101 While federal regulators also use labeling programs to motivate 
energy-effi cient purchases, their primary mechanism for reducing energy 
consumption remains technological mandates and product bans. 
 Despite federal agencies’ track record, technological mandates are not 
the only way to effectively reduce residential energy consumption. Because 
the role of behavior in energy consumption is pervasive, the role of behav-
ioral economics as a tool to reduce energy consumption will continue to 
grow. But technological mandates aren’t the only policy tools that rely on 
behavioral economics. More recently, private fi rms have employed a vari-
ety of behavioral technologies to incentivize consumers to reduce energy 
consumption. In their report for the American Council for an Energy- 
Effi cient Economy, Mazur-Stommen and Farley examine the prevalence 
of behavioral technologies being employed by energy providers:
 The majority of utility-based energy effi ciency programs focus on physi-
cal energy effi ciency improvements. But all demand-side and energy effi -
ciency programs involve human activity and decision making. Programs can 
achieve greater impact and deeper savings by incorporating insights from 
270 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

social and behavioral sciences. Many utilities have undertaken behavior- 
based programs to help meet savings targets set by regulators and their own 
business needs. 102 
 In their study, Mazur-Stommen and Farley fi nd 281 behavior-based 
energy conservation programs were offered between 2008 and 2013, with 
participation from 104 energy providers and third parties. 103 The potential 
energy savings from such behavior-based programs could be as large as 88 
million metric tons of carbon emissions. 104 For these reasons, voluntary 
technologies for reducing energy usage could act as a “behavioral wedge” 
to provide immediate emissions reductions:
 This potential “behavioral wedge” can reduce emissions much more quickly 
than other kinds of changes and deserves explicit consideration as part of 
climate policy. It can potentially help avoid “overshoot” of greenhouse gas 
concentration targets; provide a demonstration effect; reduce emissions at 
low cost; and buy time to develop new technologies, policies, and institu-
tions to reach longer-term greenhouse gas emissions targets and to develop 
adaptation strategies. 105 
 Rather than relying on technological mandates, these programs func-
tion by relying on social norms to incentivize home energy conservation. 
Using social norms can help motivate “good” behavior and discourage 
“bad” behavior “by correcting targets’ misperceptions regarding the 
behaviors’ prevalence.” 106 
 That is, those who consume lots of energy at the household level may 
not realize that their neighbors are consuming less energy. Introducing 
households to this information can change household behavior enough 
to have a signifi cant effect on energy usage. For example, Dietz calculates 
that simple no-cost behavioral changes, such as adjusting the default water 
heater temperature and changing thermostat settings, have the potential 
to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 88 million metric tons over ten 
years, 107 which represents a 10 % reduction in residential energy use. 108 
 These reductions are accomplished without technological mandates 
and their accompanying price increases and loss of consumer welfare, 
and without the rebound effect and other counterproductive side effects. 
Using norms to motivate energy consumption reduces “[c]osts to the 
household budget and harm to the environment... without reducing the 
well-being provided by energy services.” 109 This is in contrast to the one-
size-fi ts-all effi ciency standards promulgated by the DOE, DOT, and EPA, 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 271
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

which have the potential to reduce households’ well-being from energy-
using durables. 
 According to Mazur-Stommen and Farley, there are three different 
ways that programs use the insights from behavioral science to reduce 
energy consumption:
 1.  Cognition programs focus on delivering information to consumers. 
Categories include general and targeted communication efforts, social 
media, classroom education, and training. 
 2.  Calculus programs rely on consumers making economically rational 
decisions. Categories include feedback, games, incentives, home energy 
audits, and installation. 
 3.  Social interaction programs rely on interaction among people for their 
effectiveness. Categories include social marketing, person-to person 
efforts, eco-teams, peer champions, online forums, and gifts. 110 
 The following sections explain how private companies are using behav-
ioral technologies, such as social norms and information availability, to 
reduce energy consumption. 
 Opower 
 Simply providing people with smart meter data in real time in a form that 
helps them understand how much power they’re using and how much it’s 
costing them could inspire many behavioral changes that could add up to 
big energy savings—and big emissions cuts.— Washington Post , “We could 
keep a huge amount of carbon out of the atmosphere just by changing people’s 
behavior,” 2/27/2015 
 Opower is making great use of behavioral technologies to reduce 
energy consumption. Opower, a publicly held software-as-service com-
pany, achieves these reductions in energy use not through mandates or 
bans, but by providing customers with information about their energy 
usage compared to their neighbors’. Opower partners with over half of 
the 50 largest electric utilities in the USA to provide their customers with 
household-specifi c energy usage data. In addition to ranking households 
on their energy usage relative to neighbors, these reports also provide 
customers with tips for reducing energy consumption. On average, send-
272 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

ing out these home energy reports (HERs) reduces energy consumption 
by 2 %. 111 
 Alcott notes that this approach is “a remarkable departure from tra-
ditional energy effi ciency programs in that it is a non-price intervention 
designed with direct insight from behavioral science that is evaluated using 
randomized controlled trials.” 112 In contrast to technological mandates 
from the federal government, Opower is not a one-size-fi ts-all solution—
and its effects on energy consumption can be directly measured through 
meter readings. 
 Because Opower’s approach doesn’t rely on price signals to change 
behavior, it instead has to draw on another resource to motivate behav-
ior change: social norms. In their experiments on reducing litter, Cialdini 
et al. fi nd that both injunctive and descriptive norms signifi cantly change 
behavior. 113 In the case of household energy consumption, an  injunctive 
norm could be “it’s good to conserve energy,” whereas a  descriptive norm 
might be “you use more energy than your neighbors.” In a later article, 
Schultz et al. built on this research to demonstrate that communicating 
social norms to the relevant households caused them to reduce energy 
consumption. 114 
 While Opower doesn’t rely on price signals, its technique may have a 
large effect on energy use and emissions. In his evaluation of Opower’s 
HERs, Alcott fi nds that “the effects of sending Home Energy Reports are 
equivalent to a 11 to 20 % short-run price increase or a 5 % long-run price 
increase. Taken as a whole, these effects are remarkable: simply sending 
letters can signifi cantly and cost-effectively affect energy use behaviors.” 115 
 These approaches are promising because they leave consumers with the 
option to use or conserve energy based on their household needs and 
constraints. Because this is the case, any resulting behavioral changes will 
result in actual private benefi ts for consumers. These non-price signals 
direct households toward energy savings without reducing the choices 
available to them. 
 Nest 
 Another example of a behavioral technology for reducing energy con-
sumption is the Nest Thermostat, which programs itself to adjust tem-
perature settings based on observed household preferences. The Nest 
Thermostat can also sense when households are unoccupied and adjust 
temperature settings accordingly to save energy. Because temperature con-
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 273
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

trol comprises almost half of household energy use, 116 even minor adjust-
ments have the potential to conserve measureable amounts of energy. 
 While many households already have the option to program thermo-
stats, not many take advantage of this option. For consumers who value 
these savings but are not ambitious enough to do the legwork, Nest 
removes the burden of thermostat programming by automating settings 
based on observed consumer schedules and preferences after only a week 
of use. In addition to adjusting to consumer schedules, Nest can also 
adjust to seasonal changes to enhance consumer savings on utility bills. 
To the extent that households fail to choose optimal temperature settings 
at home due to procrastination or absent mindedness, these built-in fea-
tures can provide households with savings without limiting their appliance 
options or reducing their choices. 
 BLURRING THE LINE: WHOSE NUDGE IS IT, ANYWAY? 
 While is seems simple to distinguish between technological mandates from 
the federal government and behavioral technologies, the lines between pub-
lic and private nudges are starting to blur. In 2013, the idea that regulators 
would use behavioral technologies as a tool to reduce energy consumption 
was a bit far-fetched. As Mazur-Stommen and Farley commented in 2013:
 Since many behavior initiatives are still in the pilot phase, regulators do not 
have suffi cient evidence to justify treating such programs as energy effi ciency 
resources. In many states, regulatory language either fails to recognize the 
programs or defi nes them too narrowly. In states where behavior programs 
may be counted toward an energy effi ciency resource standards (EERS) 
plan, utilities may miss this opportunity by labeling their programs as mar-
keting initiatives rather than as energy savings mechanisms. 117 
 However, this dynamic is beginning to change. As the  Washington Post 
noted in 2015, the success of current behavioral programs suggests that 
these technologies will become more popular with federal regulators who 
are seeking to reduce energy consumption. 118 Private nudges, including 
those provided by companies like Opower, are being incorporated due to 
federal and state policies, rather than business motivations or altruism. For 
example, in 2011, Hunt Alcott noted the importance of incentives from 
federal and state governments for behavioral technologies:
274 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Regulated utilities typically have the incentive to increase instead of decrease 
their customers’ energy use. Why are utilities working with OPOWER? The 
company’s partners are typically either non-profi t municipal utilities whose 
goals include energy conservation or regulated investor-owned utilities 
in one of 24 states where policymakers have enacted energy conservation 
mandates called Energy Effi ciency Resource Standards (EERS). These regu-
lations require that electricity and natural gas retailers run energy conserva-
tion programs that reduce the quantity of energy demanded in their service 
territory by some amount relative to counterfactual, typically a few percent 
over several years. For example, under Minnesota’s New Generation Energy 
Act of 2007, utilities in that state are required to run conservation programs 
that reduce energy demand by 1.5 % each year. 119 
 In addition, EPA’s recently proposed clean power rule initially included 
provisions attempting to codify behavioral technologies for reducing 
energy consumption by including demand-side energy effi ciency as one of 
the “building blocks” available to state governments for carbon dioxide 
emissions. 120 While this building block was removed from EPA’s fi nal clean 
power plan rule, EPA expects that demand-side energy effi ciency “will be 
a signifi cant component of state plans under the Clean Power Plan” due 
to low costs of implementation and potential for energy savings. 121 
 These examples illustrate that behavioral technologies are not being 
developed in a political vacuum—in many cases, they’re not really “private 
nudges” at all, but another tool for federal regulators to govern private 
behavior. When that’s the case, it is worth bearing in mind that the great-
est benefi t of behavioral technologies in the energy effi ciency sphere is 
when they’re used to provide information and choices that consumers 
otherwise lack. Once governments begin to employ behavioral technolo-
gies as mandates rather than as frameworks, consumers will be no better 
off than they were under the old one-size-fi ts-all regulations. 
 CONCLUSION 
 In issuing energy effi ciency and fuel economy standards, federal regula-
tors draw on the behavioral economics literature to argue that consum-
ers fail to purchase these high-effi ciency appliances and fuel-effi cient cars 
due to an inadequate ability to process information about future energy 
savings. In doing so, regulators overlook the possibility that consum-
ers may have legitimate preferences for less-effi cient products based on 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 275
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

household characteristics or other observable product qualities (such as 
size, durability, safety, or reliability). 122 By regulating away the option for 
consumers to purchase the products that best suit their needs, the agen-
cies are ostensibly improving consumers’ choice structure by removing 
choices. 
 However, this approach ignores the fact that consumers—and their 
preferences—differ widely, and the best product for one household may 
not be well suited to the next household. Removing choice from the 
marketplace saddles consumers with large net costs, rather than net ben-
efi ts. In the cases where the “consumers” in question are cost-conscious 
purchasers of commercial equipment, DOE should consider alternative 
explanations for the difference between its estimates of costs and sav-
ings and the revealed calculations of purchasers. Rather than assuming 
the equipment purchasers are wrong, DOE should consider the alterna-
tive hypothesis that its analysis does not refl ect real-world conditions and 
tradeoffs. 123 
 While fuel economy and appliance effi ciency standards set technologi-
cal mandates for energy use, they don’t address the other driver of energy 
consumption: behavior. As it turns out, effi ciency standards change behav-
ior in a number of ways that can counteract the intended purposes of these 
rules. Behavioral technologies, on the other hand, allow households the 
option to buy whatever products best suit their needs, and alter energy use 
through behavioral changes rather than through technological ones. This 
provides households with the potential to reduce energy expenditures 
(and carbon emissions) without constraining their choices or resulting in 
unintended consequences. 
 NOTES 
 
1. Ted Gayer and Kip Viscusi, “Overriding Consumer Preferences with 
Energy Regulations,”  Journal of Regulatory Economics 43 (2013): 
248–264. 
 
2. Brian F. Mannix and Susan E. Dudley, “The Limits of Irrationality 
as a Rationale for Regulation,”  Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management 34(3) (2015): 705–712. 
 
3. Authors’ own calculations from agency total benefi ts reported at the 
3% discount rate for the seven effi ciency rules fi nalized in 2014. To 
reproduce these data, use rules corresponding to the following 
276 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

RINs: 1904-AC00, 1904-AB57, 1904-AC19, 1904-AC28, 1904-
AB86, 1904-AC22, 1904-AC77. 
 
4. Susan Mazur-Stommen and Kate Farley,  ACEEE Field Guide to 
Utility-Run Behavior Programs (Washington, DC: American 
Council for an Energy-Effi cient Economy, December 2013). Report 
Number 
B132: 
( http://www.iseif.org/wp-content/uploads/
2014/01/ACEEE-Report.pdf ). 
 
5. 42 U.S.C. 6295(o)(3)(B) and 6313(d)(4) ( http://www.gpo.gov/
fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2013-title42/html/USCODE-2013-
title42-chap77-subchapIII-partA-sec6295.htm ). 
 
6. Energy Policy and Conservation Act, as amended, §322 
( http://legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/EPCA.pdf ). 
 
7. Energy Policy and Conservation Act, as amended, §322(a) 
( http://legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/EPCA.pdf ). 
 
8. Energy Policy and Conservation Act, as amended, §322(b) 
( http://legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/EPCA.pdf ). 
 
9. Energy Policy and Conservation Act, as amended, §340 
( http://legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/EPCA.pdf ). 
 10. These counts do not include test procedures or determinations of cov-
erage which, while integral to the promulgation of energy effi ciency 
rules, do not in themselves establish energy conservation standards. 
 11. 77 F.R. 31917. 
 12. 78 F.R. 36315. 
 13. 77 F.R. 32307. 
 14. 76 F.R. 37407. 
 15. Kenneth Gillingham, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer,  Energy 
Effi ciency Economics and Policy (Washington, DC: Resources for the 
Future, April 2009). RFF DP 09-13. 
 16. Susan E. Dudley and Jerry Brito,  Regulation :  A Primer , 2nd Edition 
(Washington, DC: The Mercatus Center at George Mason University 
and the George Washington University Regulatory Studies Center, 
2012), 12. 
 17. Exec. Order No. 12866,  Regulatory Planning and Review , §1(a). 
 18. For examples of rules that rely on these justifi cations, see 78 F.R. 
64132, 77 F.R. 31959, 78 F.R. 36365, 77 F.R. 32375, 76 F.R. 
37540, and 79 F.R. 38203. 
 19. See, for example, 78 F.R. 64132, 77 F.R. 31959, 78 F.R. 36365, 77 
F.R. 32375, 76 F.R. 37540, and 79 F.R. 38203. 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 277
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 20. Ted Gayer and Kip Viscusi, “Overriding Consumer Preferences with 
Energy Regulations,”  Journal of Regulatory Economics 43 (2013): 263. 
 21. Sofi e E. Miller,  Whose Benefi ts Are They ,  Anyway ?  Examining the 
Benefi ts of Energy Effi ciency Rules 2007 — 2014 (Washington, DC: 
The George Washington University Regulatory Studies Center, 
September 2015).  http://regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/
sites/regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/files/downloads/
Examining-Energy-Effi ciency-Standards_SMiller-9-2015.pdf . 
 22. Sofi e E. Miller,  Whose Benefi ts Are They ,  Anyway ?  Examining the 
Benefi ts of Energy Effi ciency Rules 2007 — 2014 (Washington, DC: 
The George Washington University Regulatory Studies Center, 
September 2015). ( http://regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/
sites/regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/files/downloads/
Examining-Energy-Effi ciency-Standards_SMiller-9-2015.pdf ). 
 23. Sofi e E. Miller, “One Discount Rate Fits All? The Regressive Effects 
of DOE’s Energy Effi ciency Rule,”  Policy Perspectives 22 (2015): 
40–54.  http://www.policy-perspectives.org/article/view/15110/
pdf_21 . 
 24. Energy Policy and Conservation Act, as amended, §324 ( http://
legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/EPCA.pdf ). 
 25. Sofi e E. Miller,  Whose Benefi ts Are They ,  Anyway ?  Examining the 
Benefi ts of Energy Effi ciency Rules 2007 – 2014 (Washington, DC: The 
George Washington University Regulatory Studies Center, 
September 2015).  http://regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/
sites/regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/files/downloads/
Examining-Energy-Effi ciency-Standards_SMiller-9-2015.pdf . 
 26. Sofi e E. Miller, “One Discount Rate Fits All? The Regressive Effects 
of DOE’s Energy Effi ciency Rule,”  Policy Perspectives 22 (2015): 
40–54.  http://www.policy-perspectives.org/article/view/15110/
pdf_21 . 
 27.  Addendum to Public Interest Comment on the Department of Energy’s 
Proposed Clothes Washer Effi ciency Standards . Docket No. EE-RM-
94-403. Arlington: Mercatus Center at George Mason University. 
2000. 
( http://mercatus.org/sites/default/fi les/publication/
Clothes_Washer_Standards.pdf ). 
 28. 79 F.R. 38198. 
 29.  Addendum to Public Interest Comment on the Department of Energy ’ s 
Proposed Clothes Washer Effi ciency Standards . Docket No. EE-RM-94-
403. Arlington: Mercatus Center at George Mason University 2000. 
278 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

( http://mercatus.org/sites/default/files/publication/Clothes_
Washer_Standards.pdf ). 
 30. Brian F. Mannix and Susan E. Dudley, “The Limits of Irrationality 
as a Rationale for Regulation,”  Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management 34(3) (2015): 707. 
 31. Brian F. Mannix and Susan E. Dudley, “The Limits of Irrationality 
as a Rationale for Regulation,”  Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management 34(3) (2015): 707. 
 32. Ted Gayer and Kip Viscusi, “Overriding Consumer Preferences with 
Energy Regulations,”  Journal of Regulatory Economics 43 (2013): 
263. 
 33. Ted Gayer and Kip Viscusi, “Overriding Consumer Preferences with 
Energy Regulations,”  Journal of Regulatory Economics 43 (2013): 
248–264. 
 34. And, in fact, websites for homeowners considering high-effi ciency 
furnaces suggest they do just that. See below. 
 Don Vandervort. “Buying a High-Effi ciency Furnace.” 
HomeTips. Published April 23, 2015.  http://www.hometips.com/
buying-guides/high-effi ciency-furnaces.html . 
 35. Kenneth Gillingham, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer,  Energy 
Effi ciency Economics and Policy (Washington, DC: Resources for the 
Future, April 2009). RFF DP 09-13. §5.4. 
 36. John Ewoldt, “New Furnace Is about to Get More Expensive,”  Star 
Tribune , October 4, 2012. 
 37. 78 F.R. 64126. See also 78 F.R. 36361. 
 38. Offi ce of Management and Budget (OMB), “Circular A-4: 
Regulatory Analysis” (2003), 32. 
 39. Offi ce of Management and Budget (OMB), “Circular A-94: 
Guidelines and Discount Rates for Benefi t-Cost Analysis of Federal 
Programs”(1992), 4. 
 40. Richard G. Newell and Juha V. Siikamäki, “Individual Time 
Preferences and Energy Effi ciency.” National Bureau of Economic 
Research Working Paper No. 20969 (February 2015). 
 41. Offi ce of Management and Budget (OMB), “Circular A-4: 
Regulatory Analysis” (2003). 
 42. Sofi e E. Miller, “One Discount Rate Fits All? The Regressive Effects 
of DOE’s Energy Effi ciency Rule,”  Policy Perspectives 22 (2015): 
40–54.  http://www.policy-perspectives.org/article/view/15110/
pdf_21 . 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 279
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 43. Brian F. Mannix and Susan E. Dudley, “The Limits of Irrationality 
as a Rationale for Regulation,”  Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management 34(3) (2015): 708. 
 44. Sofi e E. Miller, “One Discount Rate Fits All? The Regressive Effects 
of DOE’s Energy Effi ciency Rule,”  Policy Perspectives 22 (2015): 
40–54.  http://www.policy-perspectives.org/article/view/15110/
pdf_21 . 
 45. Kenneth Gillingham, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer.  Energy 
Effi ciency Economics and Policy (Washington, DC: Resources for the 
Future, April 2009). RFF DP 09-13. 
 46. Shane Frederick, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue, 
“Time Discounting and Time Preference: A Critical Review,” 
 Journal of Economic Literature 40(2) (2002): 384. 
 47. Richard G. Newell and Juha V. Siikamäki, “Individual Time 
Preferences and Energy Effi ciency,” National Bureau of Economic 
Research Working Paper No. 20969 (February 2015). 
 48. Kenneth Gillingham, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer.  Energy 
Effi ciency Economics and Policy (Washington, DC: Resources for the 
Future, April 2009). RFF DP 09-13. §4.3. 
 49. Richard G. Newell, and Juha V. Siikamäki, “Individual Time 
Preferences and Energy Effi ciency,” National Bureau of Economic 
Research Working Paper No. 20969 (February 2015). 
 50. Jerry A. Hausman, “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase 
and Utilization of Energy-Using Durables,”  The Bell Journal of 
Economics 10(1) (1979): 52. 
 51. Jerry A. Hausman, “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase 
and Utilization of Energy-Using Durables,”  The Bell Journal of 
Economics 10(1) (1979): 53. 
 This was also calculated by adjusting the 2013 median US 
income for infl ation to fi nd that $51,017 in 2013 dollars is closest to 
Hausman’s fi gure of $15,000 in 1979 dollars. 
 52. Steffen Andersen, Glenn W. Harrison, Morton I. Lau, and Elisabet 
E. Rustrom, “Elicitation Using Multiple Price List Formats,” 
 Experimental Economics 9 (2006): 394. 
 53. Glenn W. Harrison, Morten Igel Lau, E. Elisabet Rutström, and 
Melonie B. Sullivan, “Eliciting Risk and Time Preferences Using 
Field Experiments: Some Methodological Issues,” in  Field 
Experiments in Economics , edited by J. Carpenter, G.W. Harrison, 
280 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

and J.A. List (Greenwich: JAI Press, Research in Experimental 
Economics, Volume 10, 2005). 
 54. Sofi e E. Miller, “One Discount Rate Fits All? The Regressive Effects 
of DOE’s Energy Effi ciency Rule,”  Policy Perspectives 22 (2015): 
40–54.  http://www.policy-perspectives.org/article/view/15110/
pdf_21 . 
 55. Sofi e E. Miller, “One Discount Rate Fits All? The Regressive Effects 
of DOE’s Energy Effi ciency Rule,”  Policy Perspectives 22 (2015): 
40–54.  http://www.policy-perspectives.org/article/view/15110/
pdf_21 . 
 56. U.S. Department of Energy Fact Sheet, “Saving Energy and Money 
with Appliance and Equipment Standards in the United States.” 
Published 
February 
2015. 
 http://energy.gov/sites/prod/
files/2015/02/f19/equipment_standards_factsheet_updated_
Feb_11_2015.pdf . 
 57. Energy Conservation Program: Energy Conservation Standards for 
Commercial Refrigeration Equipment. 78 FR 55980. 
 58. Sofi e E. Miller,  Public Interest Comment on the Department of 
Energy ’ s Proposed Rule Energy Conservation Program :  Energy 
Conservation Standards for Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
(Washington, DC: The George Washington University Regulatory 
Studies Center, November 2013).  http://regulatorystudies.colum-
bian.gwu.edu/sites/regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/fi les/
downloads/DOE_EERE-2010-BT-STD-0003.pdf . 
 59. 78 F.R. 55980. 
 60. U.S. Department of Transportation, “Corporate Average Fuel 
Economy (CAFE) Standards.” Last modifi ed August 27, 2014. 
( http://www.transportation.gov/mission/sustainability/
corporate-average-fuel-economy-cafe-standards ). 
 61. 77 F.R. 62629, author calculation based on Table I-19,  EPA ’ s 
Estimated 2017 – 2025 Model Year Lifetime Discounted Costs ,  Benefi ts , 
 and Net Benefi ts Assuming the 3 %  Discount Rate SCC Value ( Billions 
of 2010 Dollars ). 
 62. 77 F.R. 62627. 
 63. Brian F. Mannix and Susan E. Dudley, “The Limits of Irrationality 
as a Rationale for Regulation,”  Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management 34(3) (2015): 707. 
 64. 77 F.R. 62914. 
 65. 77 F.R. 62914. 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 281
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 66. 77 F.R. 62914. 
 67. 77 F.R. 63114. 
 68. David R. Henderson, “The Economics of Fuel Economy Standards,” 
 Regulation Magazine (1985): 47.  http://object.cato.org/sites/
cato.org/fi les/serials/fi les/regulation/1985/1/v9n1-6.pdf . 
 69. David R. Henderson, “The Economics of Fuel Economy Standards,” 
 Regulation Magazine (1985): 47.  http://object.cato.org/sites/
cato.org/fi les/serials/fi les/regulation/1985/1/v9n1-6.pdf . 
 70. David R. Henderson, “The Economics of Fuel Economy 
Standards,”  Regulation Magazine (1985): 47.  http://object.cato.
org/sites/cato.org/files/serials/files/regulation/1985/1/
v9n1-6.pdf . 
 71. 77 F.R. 62914. 
 72. 77 F.R. 62914. 
 73. Brian F. Mannix, “Bringing JAVA to the CAFÉ,”  Regulation 
Magazine (2001): 10.  http://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/fi les/
serials/fi les/regulation/2001/10/mercatusreports.pdf . 
 74. J. Hayden Boyd and Robert E. Mellman, “The Effect of Fuel 
Economy Standards on the U.S. Automotive Market: An Hedonic 
Demand Analysis,”  Transportation Research Part A :  Policy and 
Practice 14(5–6) (1980): 367–378. 
 75. Paul R. Portney, Ian W. H. Parry, Howard K. Gruenspecht, and 
Winston Harrington.  The Economics of Fuel Economy Standards 
(Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, November 2003). RFF 
DP 03-44, 8. 
 76.  Department of Energy ’ s Proposed Energy Effi ciency Standards for 
Consumer Appliances . Washington, DC: Executive Offi ce of the 
President, Regulatory Analysis Review Group, Council on Wage and 
Price Stability, 1980, 20. 
 77.  Department of Energy ’ s Proposed Energy Effi ciency Standards for 
Consumer Appliances . Washington, DC: Executive Offi ce of the 
President, Regulatory Analysis Review Group, Council on Wage and 
Price Stability, 1980, A-2. 
 78. Severin Borenstein, “A Microeconomic Framework for Evaluating 
Energy Effi ciency Rebound and Some Implications.” E2e Working 
Paper 
005. 
 http://e2e.haas.berkeley.edu/pdf/workingpapers/
WP005.pdf . 
 79. Paul R. Portney, Ian W. H. Parry, Howard K. Gruenspecht, and 
Winston Harrington.  The Economics of Fuel Economy Standards 
282 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

(Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, November 2003). RFF 
DP 03-44. 
 80. Henry Ruderman,  Do Appliance Effi ciency Standards Really Save 
Energy ? (Applied Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 
1988). 9.152. 
 81. 77 F.R. 63118, 77 F.R. 62629. 
 82.  Joint Technical Support Document :  Final Rulemaking for 2017–2025 
Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate 
Average Fuel Economy Standards . 
Washington, 
DC: 
U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency and U.S. National Highway 
Traffi c Safety Administration, August 2012. Chapter 4: “Economic 
and Other Assumptions Used in the Agencies’ Analysis,” 4–15. 
 83. 77 F.R. 62669. 
 84.  Joint Technical Support Document :  Final Rulemaking for 2017–2025 
Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate 
Average Fuel Economy Standards . 
Washington, 
DC: 
U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency and U.S. National Highway 
Traffi c Safety Administration, August 2012. Chapter 4: “Economic 
and Other Assumptions Used in the Agencies’ Analysis,” 4–25. 
 85.  Joint Technical Support Document :  Final Rulemaking for 2017–2025 
Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate 
Average Fuel Economy Standards . 
Washington, 
DC: 
U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency and U.S. National Highway 
Traffi c Safety Administration, August 2012. Chapter 4: “Economic 
and Other Assumptions Used in the Agencies’ Analysis,” page 
4-22–4-23. 
 86.  Joint Technical Support Document :  Final Rulemaking for 2017–2025 
Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and 
Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards . Washington, DC: 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and U.S. National 
Highway Traffi c Safety Administration, August 2012. Chapter 4: 
“Economic and Other Assumptions Used in the Agencies’ 
Analysis,” 4–19. 
 87. David L. Greene, James R. Kahn, and Robert C. Gibson, “Fuel 
Economy Rebound Effect for U.S. Household Vehicles,”  The Energy 
Journal 20(3) (1999): 1–31. 
 88. Roger Fouquet and Peter J. G. Pearson,  The Long Run Demand for 
Lighting :  Elasticities and Rebound Effects in Different Phases of 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 283
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Economic Development (Basque Country: Basque Centre for Climate 
Change (BC3), July 2011). BC3 Working Paper Series 2011–06. 
 89. Severin Borenstein, “A Microeconomic Framework for Evaluating Energy 
Effi ciency Rebound and Some Implications.” E2e Working Paper 005. 
 http://e2e.haas.berkeley.edu/pdf/workingpapers/WP005.pdf , 26. 
 90. Mark R. Jacobsen, “Evaluating US Fuel Economy Standards in a 
Model with Producer and Household Heterogeneity,”  American 
Economic Journal :  Economic Policy , 5(2) (2013): 148–87. 
 91. Virginial McConnell,  The New CAFE Standards :  Are They Enough 
on Their Own ? (Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, May 
2013). RFF DP 13-14, 2. 
 92. Winston Harrington and Alan Krupnick.  Improving Fuel Economy in 
Heavy-Duty Vehicles (Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 
March 2012). Issue Brief 12–01. 
 93. Howard K. Gruenspecht, “Differentiated Regulation: The Case of 
Auto Emissions Standards,”  The American Economic Review 72(2) 
(1982): 328–331. 
 94. David R. Henderson, “The Economics of Fuel Economy Standards,” 
 Regulation Magazine (1985): 47.  http://object.cato.org/sites/
cato.org/fi les/serials/fi les/regulation/1985/1/v9n1-6.pdf . 
 95. See Section II.G, “Safety Considerations in Establishing CAFE/
GHG Standards,” at 77 F.R. 62740-68. 
 96. 77 F.R. 62767. 
 97. From the agencies’ fi nal rule: “Additionally, we note that the total 
amount of mass reduction used in the agencies’ analysis for this rule-
making was chosen based on our assumptions about how much is 
technologically feasible without compromising safety. Again, while 
we are confi dent that manufacturers are motivated to build safe vehi-
cles, we cannot predict with certainty that they will choose to reduce 
mass in exactly the ways or amounts that the agencies have analyzed 
in response to the standards.” 77 F.R. 62767. 
 98. Mark R. Jacobsen, “Fuel Economy, Car Class Mix, and Safety,” 
 American Economic Review 101(3) (2011): 105–09. 
 99. National Research Council,  Effectiveness and Impact of Corporate Average 
Fuel Economy ( CAFE )  Standards (Washington, DC: National Academy 
Press, 2002). Chapter 2: “The CAFE Standards: An Assessment.” 
 
  For another perspective, read Appendix A of the report: “Dissent on 
Safety Issues: Fuel Economy and Highway Safety” by David L. 
Greene and Maryann Keller (117–124). 
284 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 100. The prevailing value of statistical life used by the Department of 
Transportation is currently monetized at $9.1 million. 
 
  Read more: Memorandum from Polly Trottenberg and Robert S. Rivkin to 
Secretarial Offi cers & Modal Administrators, 2013, U.S. Department of 
Transportation, Washington, DC.  Guidance on Treatment of the Economic 
Value of a Statistical Life in U.S. Department of Transportation Analyses . Page 2. 
 101. Susan Mazur-Stommen and Kate Farley,  ACEEE Field Guide to 
Utility-Run Behavior Programs (Washington, DC: American 
Council for an Energy-Effi cient Economy, December 2013). 
Report  http://www.iseif.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/
ACEEE-Report.pdf 
 102. Susan Mazur-Stommen and Kate Farley,  ACEEE Field Guide to 
Utility-Run Behavior Programs (Washington, DC: American 
Council for an Energy-Effi cient Economy, December 2013). Report 
Number B132:  http://www.iseif.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/
01/ACEEE-Report.pdf 
 103. Susan Mazur-Stommen and Kate Farley,  ACEEE Field Guide to 
Utility-Run Behavior Programs (Washington, DC: American 
Council for an Energy-Effi cient Economy, December 2013). Report 
Number B132:  http://www.iseif.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/
01/ACEEE-Report.pdf 
 104. Thomas Dietz, Gerald T. Gardnerb, Jonathan Gilliganc, Paul C. 
Sternd, and Michael P. Vandenbergh, “Household Actions Can 
Provide a Behavioral Wedge to Rapidly Reduce US Carbon 
Emissions,”  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 106(44) (2009): 18453, Table 1, 
“Achievable carbon emissions from household actions.” Table 1 
includes savings from both voluntary and non-voluntary household 
actions. Because the topic of this chapter is voluntary behavioral 
changes, the value of 88 million metric tons was tallied using emis-
sions reductions from what Dietz et al. term  A actions and  D actions , 
or voluntary behavior changes that require no cost or new equip-
ment to implement. 
 105. Thomas Dietz, Gerald T. Gardnerb, Jonathan Gilliganc, Paul C. 
Sternd, and Michael P. Vandenbergh, “Household Actions Can 
Provide a Behavioral Wedge to Rapidly Reduce US Carbon 
Emissions,”  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 106(44) (2009): 18452. 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 285
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 106. P. Wesley Schultz, Jessica M. Nolan, Robert B. Cialdini, Noah J. 
Goldstein, 
and 
Vladas 
Griskevicius, 
“The 
Constructive, 
Deconstructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms,” 
 Psychological Science 18(5) (2007): 429. 
 107. Thomas Dietz, Gerald T. Gardnerb, Jonathan Gilliganc, Paul C. 
Sternd, and Michael P. Vandenbergh, “Household Actions Can 
Provide a Behavioral Wedge to Rapidly Reduce US Carbon 
Emissions,”  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 106(44) (2009): 18453, Table 1, 
“Achievable carbon emissions from household actions.” See end-
note 70 for more information on how this value was calculated. 
 108.  Emissions of Greenhouse Gases in the U.S. :  U.S. carbon dioxide emis-
sion from residential sector energy consumption ,  1990–2009 . 
Washington, DC: U.S. Energy Information Administration, March 
31, 2011. (Download data here:  http://www.eia.gov/environ-
ment/emissions/ghg_report/tables_ghg.cfm ). 
 109. Thomas Dietz, “Altruism, Self-Interest, and Energy Consumption,” 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 112(6) (2015): 1654. 
 110. Susan Mazur-Stommen and Kate Farley,  ACEEE Field Guide to 
Utility-Run Behavior Programs (Washington, DC: American 
Council for an Energy-Effi cient Economy, December 2013). Report 
Number B132:  http://www.iseif.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/
01/ACEEE-Report.pdf 
 111. Chris Mooney, “We Could Keep a Huge Amount of Carbon Out of 
the Atmosphere Just by Changing People’s Behavior,”  Washington 
Post , February 27, 2015.  http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/
energy-environment/wp/2015/02/27/we-could-be-reaping-
much-bigger-carbon-cuts-by-changing-peoples-behavior/ . 
 112. Hunt Allcott, “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,”  Journal of 
Public Economics 95(2011): 1082–1095. 
 113. Robert B. Cialdini, Paymond R. Reno, and Carl A. Kallgren, “A 
Focus Theory of Normative Conduct: Recycling the Concept of 
Norms to Reduce Littering in Public Places,”  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 58(6) (1990): 1015–1026. 
 114. P. Wesley Schultz, Jessica M. Nolan, Robert B. Cialdini, Noah J. 
Goldstein, and Vladas Griskevicius, “The Constructive, Deconstructive, 
and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms,”  Psychological Science 18(5) 
(2007): 429–434. 
286 
S.E. MILLER AND B.F. MANNIX
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 115. Hunt Allcott, “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,”  Journal of 
Public Economics 95 (2011): 1083. 
 116.  Residential Energy Consumption Survey 2009 :  Spreadsheet :  CE3.1 
End-Use Consumption Totals and Averages , U.S. homes. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Energy Information Administration. (Download data 
here:  http://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/data/2009/
index.cfm?view=consumption ). 
 117. Susan Mazur-Stommen and Kate Farley,  ACEEE Field Guide to 
Utility-Run Behavior Programs (Washington, DC: American 
Council for an Energy-Effi cient Economy, December 2013). Report 
Number B132:  http://www.iseif.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/
01/ACEEE-Report.pdf 
 118. Chris Mooney, “We Could Keep a Huge Amount of Carbon Out of 
the Atmosphere Just by Changing People’s Behavior,”  Washington 
Post , February 27, 2015.  http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/
energy-environment/wp/2015/02/27/we-could-be-reaping-
much-bigger-carbon-cuts-by-changing-peoples-behavior/ . 
 119. Hunt Allcott, “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,”  Journal of 
Public Economics 95 (2011): 1084–5. 
 120. Amanda R. Carrico, Michael P. Vandenbergh, Paul C. Stern, and 
Thomas Dietz, “US Climate Policy Needs Behavioural Science,” 
 Nature Climate Change 5 (2015): 177–179. 
 121.  EPA Factsheet :  The Clean Power Plan. Key Changes and Improvements 
from Proposal to Final . Washington, DC: The U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency. August 2015. ( http://www.epa.gov/airqual-
ity/cpp/fs-cpp-key-changes.pdf ). 
 122.  Addendum to Public Interest Comment on the Department of Energy ’ s 
Proposed Clothes Washer Effi ciency Standards . Docket No. EE-RM-94-
403. Arlington: Mercatus Center Regulatory Studies Program. 2000. 
( http://mercatus.org/sites/default/files/publication/Clothes_
Washer_Standards.pdf ). 
 123. Sofi e E. Miller.  Public Interest Comment on the Department of 
Energy ’ s Proposed Rule Energy Conservation Program :  Energy 
Conservation Standards for Commercial Refrigeration Equipment . 
Washington, DC: The George Washington University Regulatory 
Studies Center, November 2013. ( http://regulatorystudies.colum-
bian.gwu.edu/sites/regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/fi les/
downloads/DOE_EERE-2010-BT-STD-0003.pdf ). 
ONE STANDARD TO RULE THEM ALL 287
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

289
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_11
 Nudges in Health Care 
 Robert   Graboyes and  Jessica   Carges 
 INTRODUCTION: SLAYING DRAGONS, SWATTING BUGS 
 Nudges are a diffi cult topic to broach. Compared to other health care 
topics, they are small and, by nature, non-coercive (or only partially coer-
cive). Almost any nudge, taken in isolation, can seem either reasonable 
or innocuous or both to those of varying ideological persuasions. It is in 
the aggregate, or in their secondary effects, where nudges may become 
expensive and disruptive. 
 It is an altogether different matter to write about, say, the Food and 
Drug Administration’s (FDA) approval process for life-saving pharma-
ceuticals. There, the issues are stark. FDA regulations impose the full 
police powers of the state. People are forbidden to sell, give away, or 
use certain chemical substances the FDA has not approved. 1 Violators 
can be fi ned, arrested, or denied the right to practice their professions. 
Assuming a drug has been correctly judged unsafe by the FDA, people 
who used it might suffer grave illness or death. 2 If the FDA has cor-
rectly judged another drug to be safe but ineffective, a patient may 
suffer for using the  unapproved drug, rather than an approved (and, 
presumably safe and effective) drug. 3 On the other hand, patients may 
suffer or die for lack of a safe, effective drug that the FDA has wrongly 
 R.  Graboyes () •  J.  Carges 
 Mercatus Center at  George Mason University ,  Arlington ,  VA ,  USA 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

disapproved or (at least) not yet approved. 4 In a blog comment, Alex 
Tabarrok wrote:
 Amazing that even after 50 years Thalidomide still scares. The basic fact is 
that dangerous drugs will sometimes be approved. That is a fact. But you 
also have to look at the costs of not approving drugs. Drugs that are  not 
permitted by the FDA also kill. There is an invisible graveyard fi lled with the 
bodies of people who would have lived if more new drugs had been available 
and sooner. 5 
 FDA issues are bold and stark—big, and painted in primary colors. 
The questions are clear-cut. The implications, fi nancial and human, are 
massive. We could write similarly about other great issues of health care 
policy: hospital cartelization, Medicare reimbursement, the provision of 
care under Medicaid, the Affordable Care Act (ACA), medical licen-
sure, the structure of medical school curriculum, international trade in 
medical goods and services, and mandatory vaccination. 6 If one wishes 
to arouse a reader’s emotions, it is not diffi cult with big issues. If one 
wishes to do analytical work, it is helpful that the effects be large and 
easily measureable. With “big” issues, both the promises and the pitfalls 
are sizable. 
 Not so much with nudges. They are more diffi cult to pin down because 
their individual, immediate effects generally seem small and have a degree 
of voluntarism. They are evolutionary, not revolutionary. Erosive, not 
avulsive. 
 To criticize nudges is to swat bugs, not slay dragons. The swatting is 
all the more diffi cult because most would agree that some of the bugs are 
benefi cial. 
 So the effects are small and may be diffi cult to measure, if they are mea-
sured at all. And, in a world in which there are many nudges, interactions 
among them may mean that the combined effects of multiple nudges may 
differ signifi cantly from the sum of their individual effects. In attempting 
to measure nudges, we may run afoul of Lord Kelvin’s dictum:
 [W]hen you cannot express it in numbers, your knowledge is of a meager 
and unsatisfactory kind; it may be the beginning of knowledge, but you 
have scarcely on your thoughts advanced to the state of Science. 7 
 This chapter will fi rst discuss the streams of thought that contribute to 
the creation and use of nudges with specifi c examples of where they exist 
290 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

in health care policy. Following this overview is a series of questions that 
looks at the validity of using nudges in policy. 
 NUDGES: CONFLUENCE OF LITERATURES 
 The idea of a health care nudge is that wise, benevolent experts can devise 
institutions that subtly induce us to make better health choices than we 
would make on our own—according to our own preferences. Nudges in 
health care draw on at least three streams of thought from, respectively, 
science, ethics, and politics:
 1.  Behavioral Economics : Attempts to increase the explanatory and predic-
tive power of economic theory by providing it with more psychologi-
cally plausible foundations. 8 In health care, evolutionary psychology 
and prospect theory are the subsets of behavioral economics that most 
give rise to calls for nudges. 
 2.  Medical paternalism : A notion, dating from antiquity, which holds that 
laypeople are unprepared to make choices with respect to their own health, 
whereas medical professionals can make rational choices on our behalf. 
This view holds that such paternalism is in the patient’s own interest. 
 3.  Progressivism: A political ideology that still underpins our modern view 
of government. Associated with Woodrow Wilson and other early pro-
gressives, progressivism created the belief that the state is best suited to 
amass expertise and design social institutions to better the rest of us. 
 Combining all three into a simple example:
•  Behavioral economics : Politicians like New  York’s Mayor Michael 
Bloomberg have effectively argued that our carbohydrate-craving 
DNA urges us to drink larger quantities of sugary soft drinks than 
our health-conscious preferences would wish us to do. 
•  Medical paternalism: Limiting the size of soft-drink cups will dimin-
ish our consumption, which medical experts insist will result in 
increased health and therefore, happiness. 
•  Progressivism: The government, therefore, should outlaw the larger 
cups, thereby nudging people into lower carbohydrate intake. 
 This intersection of science, ethics, and politics produces a strong 
normative component melding into advocacy for behaviorist choice 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 291
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 architectures to better our health. Each literature takes aim (in different 
ways) at the central assumption of neoclassical economics—namely, that 
people are rational or behave as if they were. 
 The classic statement of the rationality assumption comes from Milton 
Friedman, who argued that we need not believe in the literal truth of human 
rationality to fi nd it a useful construct. Friedman argues the assumption is 
valuable as long as it yields useful predictions about human behavior. 9 
 Behavioral Economics I (Evolutionary Psychology) 
 Behavioral economists have searched for systematic, predictable deviations 
from rationality, and they often use evolutionary psychology to illustrate 
deviations that can be explained in terms of genetic survival strategies. 
Among other things, evolutionary psychologists suggest that altruism has 
an evolutionary rationale and that our genes drive us to do things that 
confl ict with our preferences (e.g., eating too many cashews at a sitting);
 Economics has long found itself in the dock, accused of being the impe-
rial discipline conquering all other social sciences. The profession must now 
face having the tables turned and being taken over by a new science that will 
include standard economics as a special subsection. Just as Einstein’s theory of 
relativity turned Newton’s theory of gravity into a special case, so evolutionary 
psychology contains utility theory as one very useful but limited paradigm. 10 
 The challenge to by-the-book rationality was captured in Alan 
Greenspan’s memorable assertion that fi nancial markets were exhibiting 
“irrational exuberance”. According to this body of theory, the traditional 
neoclassical economist’s view of rationality is that humans are purely self- 
interested calculating machines. But often times, many examples prove 
diffi cult to explain with this defi nition. 
 Pinker provides the following example:
 More puzzling is discounting: the tendency in all of us to prefer a large late 
reward to a small early one, but then to fl ip our preference as time passes and 
both rewards draw nearer. A familiar example is deciding before dinner to skip 
dessert (a small early reward) in order to lose weight (a large late one), but suc-
cumbing to temptation when the waiter takes the dessert orders. … The weak-
ness of the will is an unsolved problem in economics and psychology alike. 11 
 Pinker then notes that economist Thomas Schelling ponders the “ratio-
nal consumer” construct by wading through a series of examples: smokers 
292 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

who wish to quit; a high-calorie diner who wishes to slim down; a televi-
sion viewer with work to do. 12 
 Evolutionary psychology suggests that we are adapted not to the world 
we live in now, but to the environment in which our species spent most of 
its history. Agriculture is considered a relatively recent development, and 
therefore, humans would be designed to produce success in the environ-
ment of small hunter-gatherer bands. 13 Discounting is therefore explained 
as a systematic deviation from neoclassical economists’ defi nition of ratio-
nality due to evolutionary biases. As the above examples have shown, most 
people appear to have a very high discount rate for choices in the near 
future, and a much lower discount rate for alternative goals that are more 
distant. In a hunter-gatherer environment, nothing in the future is guar-
anteed or certain. It makes logical sense to value things that are assured 
immediately, even if today those assumptions do not necessarily still hold. 
Our evolutionary biases make us more susceptible to immediate, smaller 
rewards than future, larger ones. 14 
 Continuing with Pinker:
 Schelling notes the strange ways in which we defeat our self-defeating behav-
ior: putting the alarm clock across the room so we won’t turn it off and fall 
back to sleep, authorizing our employers to put part of each paycheck away 
for retirement, placing tempting snacks out of reach, setting our watches 
fi ve minutes ahead. Odysseus had his crewmates plug their ears with wax and 
tie him to the mast so he could hear the Sirens’ alluring song and not steer 
the ship toward them and onto the rocks. 15 
 Schelling, Pinker notes, sees a modularity of the mind. That “people 
behave sometimes as if they had two selves. … The two are in continual 
contest for control.” Pinker says “When the spirit is willing but the fl esh 
is weak, such as in pondering a diet-busting dessert, we can feel two very 
different kinds of motives fi ghting within us, one responding to sights and 
smells, the other to doctors’ advice.” 16 
 Our distant hunter-gatherer relatives can enlighten us on current health 
care trends as well. Genetic selection reveals that tendencies to eat too 
much salt or fat were adapted from an environment where such foods 
were rarer and labor more physical. Robin Hanson points out that among 
hunter-gatherers:
 Aid for injury is treated similarly to other forms of aid, such as sharing meat 
from [a] hunt, participating in a work party to build a hut, or joining in an 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 293
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

attempt to avenge the killing of an associate. Failing to help is interpreted as 
being less loyal to a group, coalition, or partner. 17 
 We still use health care to signal loyalty today, whether it’s buying lots 
of health care for our families or employees or pushing lots of care onto 
dying parents. By this argument, it is less concerning whether or not the 
health care is actually effective, just as long as it appears that we care suffi -
ciently about others. Humans still cannot stand to be thought of as uncar-
ing or unhelpful, since it is still interpreted as being less loyal to the group. 
 What can we conclude from all of this? Across cultures and time and 
ideologies, there is near-consensus that people are internally confl icted—
that in each of us, a rational, well-informed being battles our animalis-
tic, evolutionary nature. This duality appears especially strong in matters 
related to health. We engage in strategies to steer our actions more towards 
well-informed conclusions instead of evolutionary desires and sometimes, 
as with Odysseus, we delegate those actions to others. 
 Behavioral Economics II (Prospect Theory) 
 Evolutionary biology tells us that our DNA can steer us away from ratio-
nality, particularly in matters related to health, and that we can engage in 
strategies to tack back toward rationality. Prospect Theory is the system-
atic study of those steering mechanisms. 
 Prospect Theory holds that our choices depend strongly on how the 
choices are presented to us. This school of thought began with two 
Israeli psychologists, Daniel Kahneman 18 and Amos Tversky, who illus-
trated deviations from rationality through a large set of simple anomalies. 
Kahneman provides an excellent survey of this literature. 19 Graboyes pro-
vides examples 20 :
 Why will a homeowner cut his own lawn to save $10, but will not mow his 
neighbor’s lawn to earn $10? In a simple economic model, the two acts 
appear to be identical opportunities to choose between income and leisure, 
but the homeowner’s choices seem inconsistent. 
 Economics generally presumes that people prefer more choices to fewer 
choices. Why, then, will rational people thank you for removing a bowl of 
tempting, fat-rich cashews from their sight—thereby depriving them of a 
consumption choice? 
 Why will people travel across town to save $10 on a clock radio or sweater 
but not to save $10 on a wide-screen TV or a car? 
294 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 The rational-actor model underlying modern economics implicitly 
assumes that people act as if they were powerful, accurate calculating 
engines. According to Kahneman:
 Are people good intuitive statisticians? We already know that people are 
good intuitive grammarians: at age four a child effortlessly conforms to the 
rules of grammar as she speaks, although she has no idea that such rules 
exist. Do people have a similar intuitive feel for the basic principles of sta-
tistics? Amos reported that the answer was a qualifi ed yes. We had a lively 
debate in the seminar and ultimately concluded that a qualifi ed no was a 
better answer. 21 
 Kahneman says:
 The assumption that agents are rational provides the intellectual foundation 
for the libertarian approach to public policy: do not interfere with the indi-
vidual’s right to choose, unless the choices harm others. 22 
 Kahneman says he heard Gary Becker, partly in jest and partly not, say 
that the rise in obesity might result from people anticipating that a cure 
for diabetes is nigh upon us. Says Kahneman, “He was making a valuable 
point: when we observe people acting in ways that seem odd, we should 
fi rst examine the possibility that they have a good reason to do what they 
do.” 23 It is suggested that psychology should only enter when economic 
reasoning becomes implausible—which Kahneman thinks Becker’s reason-
ing is. Kahneman then frames the dispute as one “between the Chicago 
school and the behavioral economists, who reject the extreme form of the 
rational-agent model.” 24 Prospect Theory offers, in effect, a how-to guide 
on dealing with the internal confl icts that evolutionary biologists describe. 
 How a reference point is determined and framed in the decision-making 
process has large impacts in health care. The work of Rothman, Salovey, 
and colleagues on message framing has tested prospect theory predictions 
of how the description of test outcomes as gains or losses (as well as the 
conceptualization of the purpose of the test as preventative vs. diagnostic 
and the consequent perception of whether the test is “safe” or “risky”) can 
affect test rates in health care. 25 
 Alan Schwartz, Julie Goldberg, and Gordon Hazen illustrate that:
 Specifi cally, message framing theories predict that when a procedure is per-
ceived as risky (e.g., cancer screening tests may cause a patient to fi nd out 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 295
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

that they have cancer), loss-framed messages will promote testing more 
strongly than gain-framed messages, because people favor risky prospects 
over sure prospects in the domain of losses. On the other hand, when a 
procedure is perceived as safe (e.g., sunscreen prevents sunburn and skin 
cancer), gain-framed messages are predicted to be more effective because 
people prefer sure prospects to risky prospects in the domain of gains. 26 
 There are a number of other studies that offer similar predictions, show-
ing the true power of Prospect Theory in designing health care nudges. 27 
 Medical Paternalism 
 Eric Topol, cardiologist and editor of Medscape, reviews the history of 
medical paternalism from Hippocrates on. 28 He quotes Richard Gordon’s 
comic novel: “doctors consider themselves the most evolved of the human 
species.” 29 
 Topol says of Hippocrates, “if he was the father of medicine, he was also 
the father of medical paternalism.” 30 Among other things, Hippocrates 
urged physicians to conceal most things from patients, including pres-
ent condition, prognosis, and medicinal formulas. Topol documents other 
physicians who thought it advantageous to avoid honesty with patients. 
But beyond matters of honesty and dishonesty (which may not be relevant 
to the nudge discussion), Topol offers the following:
 Dr. Benjamin Rush, who is regarded as both a founding father of the United 
States and the father of American psychiatry, wrote that doctors should 
“avoid sacrifi cing too much to the taste of (their) patients. … Yield to them 
in matters of little consequence, but maintain an infl exible authority over 
them in matters essential to life.” 31 
 Topol says “what has been called the Age of Paternalism lasted for 
thousands of years.” He quotes Siegler:
 This model of medicine—the “doctor knows best” model—was premised 
on trust in the physician’s technical skills and moral stature, was buttressed 
by an attribution of magical powers to the healer, and was characterized by 
patient dependency and physician control. 32 
 The symbol of the medical professions is the Rod of Asclepius—the 
Greek god of medicine and son of Apollo, 33 hinting at the divine nature of 
296 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

medicine. (The American version has generally been the two-snake cadu-
ceus borne by Hermes). 
 Paternalism has persisted into the twenty-fi rst century. Topol says he 
became involved in a dispute with the American Medical Association 
(AMA) over his call for relaxing medical paternalism. The dispute arose 
from an interview with the  Wall Street Journal :
 But what has really gotten me stirred up is the issue of whether patients 
should have access to their own health data. The AMA […] was lobby-
ing the government that consumers should not have access directly to their 
DNA data; that it has to be mediated through a doctor. The AMA did a 
survey of 10,000 doctors, and 90 % said they have no comfort using genom-
ics in their clinical practice. So how could they be the ultimate mediator by 
which the public gets access to their DNA data? That really speaks to medi-
cal paternalism. 34 
 There is a long list of provisions from the AMA’s 1847  Code of Ethics . 35 
Physicians, it says, pursue a “noble task.” Later, “The obedience of a 
patient to the prescriptions of his physician should be prompt and implicit. 
He should never permit his own crude opinions as to their fi tness, to 
infl uence his attention to them,” and “A patient should never send for 
a consulting physician without the express consent of his own medical 
attendant.” And “A patient should, after his recovery, entertain a just and 
enduring sense of the value of the services rendered to him by his physi-
cians, for these are of such a character, that no mere pecuniary acknowl-
edgement can repay or cancel them.” 
 No revisions occurred until 1903. Informed consent does not enter the 
AMA’s lexicon until 1957. There are many examples suggesting that the 
ethic of paternalism persists in medicine to this day. 
 Ronald M.  Epstein, MD, professor of family medicine, psychiatry, 
and oncology, and director, Center for Communication and Disparities 
Research, University of Rochester (NY) Medical Center, insists “most of 
us do act paternalistically in ways that we often don’t realize, […] for 
example, even the tone of voice you use to describe each option, or order 
in which you present a choice to a patient, may infl uence a patient’s deci-
sion. […] And so, I think we are unwittingly paternalistic some of the 
time... If you favor a certain option, you’ll present it and frame it a bit 
differently.” 36 
 There is a supreme irony in the paternalism of the past two centu-
ries. The AMA has appeared a decade or two into the period of medicine 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 297
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

known as “therapeutic nihilism.” In the early nineteenth century, Western 
medicine arrived at the conclusion that it was doing more harm to patients 
than good. For the next century or so, physicians largely restricted them-
selves to diagnosis and prognosis, rather than therapeutics. 37 
 Professor Lawrence Henderson of Harvard described 1910–1912 as 
“the Great Divide” when, for the fi rst time ever, “a random patient with 
a random disease consulting a doctor chosen at random stands a bet-
ter than 50/50 chance of benefi ting from the encounter.” 38 But Lewis 
Thomas wrote that even in the mid-1930s, Harvard’s Medical School 
largely trained physicians “not to meddle” with the course of disease. 39 
Therapeutic medicine began to advance in earnest with the widespread use 
of penicillin in the late 1930s. 
 The correctness of medical paternalism reached a high plateau in 1963, 
with the publication of Arrow’s “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics 
of Health Care.” 40 Arrow enumerated the differences between health 
care and other areas of the economy: domination by nonprofi ts, insurers 
as intermediaries, consumer ignorance, and so forth. For the next half- 
century, this paper became the founding document for the notion that 
“health care is different”—that human rationality fails at the borders of 
medicine. 41 
 Behavioral economics suggests an internal confl ict between the rational 
and non-rational, and that the deviations are predictable and remediable. 
A body of tradition and literature adds that these circumstances are espe-
cially acute in the area of health and health care. 
 Progressivism 
 Woodrow Wilson entered the White House 12  years after the fi rst 
Progressive Era president, Theodore Roosevelt. But the intellectual under-
pinnings of the expansive, activist modern state derive from the scholarly 
writings of Wilson years before the onset of the Progressive Era. Though 
progressivism advocated for many reforms, the central idea was that the 
government should lead efforts to change society’s ills. 42 
 Perhaps the fi rst and most important piece of Progressive Era legisla-
tion was the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. Its main purpose was to 
ban foreign and interstate traffi c in adulterated or mislabeled food and 
drug products, and it directed the government to inspect products and 
refer offenders to prosecutors. The act required that active ingredients 
be placed on the label of a drug’s packaging and that drugs could not 
298 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

fall below purity levels established by the United States Pharmacopeia or 
the National Formulary. 43 For the fi rst time, the federal government took 
responsibility for the safety of food and drugs in the USA. 
 Calls for broader federal involvement in health care began around the 
same time. The Socialist Party called for national unemployment, old 
age, and sickness insurance in its election platforms. 44 The ideas reached 
mainstream political circles in 1912, when Roosevelt’s Progressive Party 
adopted a platform that “called for industrial health and safety standards, 
the prohibition of child labor, a minimum wage for women, compensa-
tion for industrial accidents, injuries, and occupational diseases, and ‘the 
protection of home life against the hazards of sickness, irregular employ-
ment and old age through the adoption of a system of social insurance.’ 45 
 The twentieth century saw a steady increase in federal and state inter-
vention in health care. The federal government expanded its regulation of 
food and drugs in several big steps over the century, adding effi cacy as a 
standard for approval and adding medical devices to drugs. 46 
 Milton and Rose Friedman argued that through the twentieth century, 
the AMA acted as an anti-competitive guild, pushing for federal and state 
legislation to restrict who could practice medicine and how. 47 
 NUDGE THEORY 
 To reiterate, we have three strains of thought converging: Humans exhibit 
systematic deviations from rationality and we can predictably steer their 
behavior. We ought to steer health-related behavior. And the state is well-
suited for the task. Combining these notions, we arrive at the modern day 
use of behavioral economics and the idea of nudges. Food consumption is 
often the point of departure. 
 In  Nudge :  Improving Decisions about Health ,  Wealth and Happiness , 
Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein present the notion of a nudge by way of 
a familiar, pedestrian example—the placement of food in a grocery store 
or cafeteria. 48 Any shopper knows instinctively that one is especially prone 
to purchase items placed at eye level in the aisles or placed anywhere in 
the checkout line. Food vendors pour large sums into market research on 
shelf placement and negotiate fi ercely on this dimension, suggesting the 
truth of the proposition. It is doubtful that many would disagree with this 
point. Disagreements arise as to what to do with such knowledge. 
 Behavioral economics takes aim at a  homo economicus —economic man. 
This notion from neoclassical economics is one of rational  individuals 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 299
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

who observe an array of options, evaluate them with perfection, and then 
choose optimally (according to their preferences). 49  Homo economicus 
is by design an artifi cial construct—an exaggeration, a simplifi cation 
dreamed up by economists to clarify their analyses. In the simplest form 
of this construct, the presentation of options, indeed, has no impact on 
choices. People rationally choose among the options, irrespective of the 
presentation. 
 This discussion thus far has involved positive analysis, not normative. 
The behavioralist economists are correct in arguing that  homo economicus 
is an unrealistic simplifi cation of human behavior. Neoclassical economists 
may protest that they are perfectly aware of the caricatured nature of  homo 
economicus , adding that, despite its unrealistic assumptions, it yields useful 
analysis. Behavioral economists argue that non-behavioralists take it too 
literally, and, in that respect, they are probably correct. 
 Thaler and Sunstein, however, venture forth from these positive propo-
sitions and into normative behavioral economics. Their argument is that: 
(1) choices are necessarily sensitive to how they are presented; (2) there 
is no such thing as a neutral presentation; and (3) public policy should 
therefore focus on steering individual choices by suggesting or mandating 
the initial presentations. 
 In health, Thaler and Sunstein single out three areas for nudges: 
Medicare prescription choices, organ donations, and environmental pro-
tection. 50 Other behavioral economists focus their efforts on areas such 
as obesity, alcoholism, drug use, sexually transmitted diseases, tobacco, 
exercise, driving, and prescription drug compliance. 51 
 Thaler and Sunstein describe themselves as “libertarian paternalists,” 
though that self-designation is controversial. They describe the libertarian 
aspect of their position as follows:
 The libertarian aspect of our strategies lies in the straightforward insistence 
that, in general, people should be free to do what they like—and opt out of 
undesirable arrangements if they want to do so. To borrow a phrase from 
the late Milton Friedman, libertarian paternalists urge that people should be 
“free to choose.” 52 
 They describe their paternalism as follows:
 The paternalistic aspect lies in the claim that it is legitimate for choice archi-
tects to try to infl uence people’s behavior in order to make their lives longer, 
300 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

healthier, and better. In other words, we argue for self-conscious efforts, by 
institutions in the private sector and also by the government, to steer peo-
ple’s choices in directions that will improve their lives. In our understanding 
policy is “paternalistic” if it tries to infl uence choices in a way that will make 
choosers better off,  as judged by themselves . 53 
 The authors’ “libertarian paternalism” is, we would argue, clearly 
paternalistic. The libertarian aspect, we would continue, is much more 
debatable. 
 NUDGES: POLICY QUESTIONS 
 This section illustrates a series of ideas relevant to nudge-related public 
policy. Thaler and Sunstein recognize many of these problems in their 
book. 
 Are Fully Voluntary Nudges Objectionable? 
 Groceries and (as described by Thaler and Sunstein) cafeterias routinely 
practice nudging through placement of foods. Placing candy bars in the 
check-out lines where children often linger while parents await cashiers 
is presumably to nudge shoppers into a last-minute impulse purchase. 
Nutrition activists argue that removing the candy will nudge people away 
from purchasing the unhealthy candy bars. Some stores removed candies 
from those locations. Others didn’t. 
 These actions nudge people into healthier choices without limiting 
their options. Most people won’t argue against nudges in this context, 
but in other contexts it is more clearly seen as manipulation. Even fully 
voluntary, private-sector nudges draw some opposition. 
 Facebook has been something of a factory for nudges. Periodically, the 
company alters the default settings for, say, privacy, to nudge users into 
making certain decisions. These changes often draw vociferous criticism. 
Facebook also engaged in an experiment to determine whether the order 
of posts on a user’s screen could nudge the user toward a particular mood. 
The experiment was successful, but the public outcry over perceived 
manipulation of users was signifi cant. 54 
 Nudges do not have to involve taxpayer funds, the power of the state, 
or mandatory usage of the venue. And yet there can still be sizable opposi-
tion to what is perceived of by some as manipulation. 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 301
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Are Voluntary Nudges Voluntary? 
 It is also relevant to ask whether voluntary nudges are truly voluntary. 
Consider the case of New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s policy of 
nudging consumers away from soft-drink over-consumption. The policy 
banned the 32-ounce “Big Gulp”-sized drinks that are popular purchase 
items at convenience stores. As Oliver Burkeman in  The Guardian opined:
 Ridiculous as all this is, it’s worth briefl y recapping why it makes no sense 
to see Bloomberg’s policy as an incursion on anyone’s liberty. The proposal 
is a classic example of a “nudge”, as defi ned by Cass Sunstein and Richard 
Thaler in their famous book of that name. It doesn’t stop you guzzling as 
much Coke as you like, but it modifi es your “choice architecture”—the 
context in which you decide how much Coke to guzzle—so as to guide you 
towards the healthier option. Likewise, as Sunstein and Thaler explain, you 
can transform the dietary choices of school pupils by making salads slightly 
easier to reach for than fries; nobody’s deprived of their right to fries. You 
can transform savings habits with bank accounts that move a portion of 
wages into a separate account unless the user opts out. 55 
 Burkeman later appended an update to his  Guardian article noting 
that Thaler himself had distanced himself from Bloomberg’s large-soda 
ban, arguing on Twitter that, “To state the obvious: a BAN is not a 
NUDGE. The opposite in fact. So don’t blame Bloomberg’s ban on large 
soda cups on us.” 56 
 So we have a curious juxtaposition. Burkeman argues that the large- 
soda ban is a nudge because the consumer’s diminished convenience 
does not constitute a reduction in anyone’s liberty. Thaler does not con-
sider this a nudge because it is a “ban” whose inconvenience, apparently, 
reduces consumers’ liberty. 
 We are tempted to argue that the soda ban is both a nudge and a 
reduction in liberty—that the two concepts are not mutually exclusive. 
Bloomberg’s law did not prohibit a consumer from purchasing 32 ounces 
of soda, but only made doing so slightly less convenient. We might ask 
whether this is qualitatively different from, say, limiting candy bars to 
inconvenient-to-reach grocery shelves—something Thaler does cite as a 
nudge. The real lesson here is that the difference between nudge and 
coercion is subjective. And add to this our earlier comment: “Almost any 
nudge, taken in isolation, can seem either reasonable or innocuous or 
both.” 
302 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 But the 32-ounce cup ban is not voluntary on the part of the ven-
dors. And that ban entails real costs and diverts public funds from other 
uses. Consider a city deciding whether to impose vendor mandates in 
order to nudge customers in a desired direction. The government must 
expend resources to determine which nudges, if any, are desirable. The 
soft drink size is, after all, not the only nudge on the table. Let’s say 
there are simultaneous drives to ban or limit trans fats, to require various 
forms of nutritional labeling, to have fresh fruit available, and so on. Each 
possible mandate requires its own cost-benefi t analysis. The government, 
the wholesaler, and the retailers will engage in rent-seeking activities. For 
those mandates to be adopted, the government must establish an inspec-
tion and enforcement capability. With choices limited, profi t margins 
(already razor-thin in these establishments) will be thinned even more. 
Depending on the bottom-line, the added regulatory burden can be the 
straw that breaks the camel’s back, leading the most marginal establish-
ments to close. Thus, there are potential labor market implications, and 
so forth. 
 Are Nudges Effi cacious? 
 Then there is the question of whether the government actually gets 
nudges right. 57 Policymakers, like everyday people, are not fully rational 
and are also not fully knowledgeable on every subject. This leads to policy 
recommendations that can be wrong, which can harm the very people 
they are intended to help. For example, in the 1970s USDA Dietary 
Guidelines encouraged Americans to consume low-fat diets in order to 
decrease the risk of heart disease and obesity. 58 Despite the lack of evi-
dence on these claims, it took until 2010 for the Dietary Guidelines com-
mittee to stop recommending limits on total fat. An article in the  Annals 
of Internal Medicine conducted a meta-analysis of all available evidence 
and concluded that limits on fats should be lifted. 59 Despite the reversal, 
the American public still is more prone to actively avoid fats compared to 
carbohydrates. 60 
 A large nudge for Americans was the 1990 Nutrition Labeling and 
Education Act, which required packaged food companies to apply nutri-
tional labels by mid-1994. 61 In 1990, no state had an obese population 
exceeding 14 % of the total population. By 1994, the highest percentage 
was 19 %. In 2013, no state had fewer than 20 %, and 2 states were over 
35 %. 62 There have been a number of local studies done to examine the 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 303
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

effects of nutrition labeling. These include calorie labels at McDonald’s 
fast food chains in New  York, 15 restaurant chains in King County, 
Washington, and Starbucks. Evidence is overwhelming that posting of 
caloric information has little effect on the purchasing behavior of consum-
ers. 63 The Age of Labeling became the Age of Obesity. 
 At this stage, the source of the obesity epidemic is unknown. Burn 
more calories than you consume and you’ll lose weight. But cutting calo-
ries doesn’t automatically mean weight loss. If cutting out 300 calories a 
day induces lethargy, maybe you’ll spend more time on the couch, burn 
300 fewer calories, and lose no weight; maybe you’ll burn 500 calories 
fewer and actually gain weight. If you think the answers are easy, explain 
this: as we’ve grown heavier since the 1980s, so have animals, including 
pets, wildlife, and even laboratory animals on controlled diets. 64 No one 
really knows why. 
 Consider, also, that obesity is a serious problem in the one segment of 
American society where mandates and nudges ought to be at their most 
potent—the military. In many circumstances, the military services have a 
considerable degree of control over service personnel’s diet and exercise. 
And yet, obesity is an increasing problem for the military. 65 
 Are Nudges Inherently Political? 
 Lee Harris raises the prospect that nudges will transmogrify into shoves. 
In other words, the paternalism will rise and the libertarianism will fade. 66 
Harris minimizes the differences between hard paternalism and the softer 
idea of nudges:
 The old metaphor of social engineering has been replaced with a new meta-
phor: the central planners are now architects of choice, to use Thaler and 
Sunstein’s image, though they speak only of choice architecture, as if a piece 
of architecture could come about without an architect to design it. 67 
 Both demand a cognitive elite, making decisions on behalf of the rest of 
us; and the cognitive elite is composed of fallible, self-interested, irrational 
human beings, much like the rest of us. Harris describes the ACA this way:
 Obamacare was the fi rst large-scale attempt to implement the principles 
of libertarian paternalism that, as its architects assured us, would make 
us all healthier, wealthier, and happier. Prior to the rollout, Obamacare’s 
architects were only able to present their designs in the form of abstract 
304 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

blueprints—blueprints which looked just as beautiful and elegant on paper 
as the collective farm movement had looked to its Soviet designers. 68 
 Harris adds that like earlier, more overt social planning schemes, this 
one, too, “was strikingly like one of the bizarrely complicated machines 
imagined by the great cartoonist Rube Goldberg.” The nudges bundled 
together as the ACA often failed or spun off unintended consequences. 69 
 The offer of federal funds was supposed to nudge states into expand-
ing Medicaid and establishing health insurance exchanges. Only a few 
more than half expanded Medicaid, while just over one-third established 
exchanges. Matthew Baum quotes David Hyman as saying it isn’t even 
clear in this case what constitutes a successful nudge or a failed one. 70 It is 
fair to say that the number of states expanding Medicaid and establishing 
exchanges is less than ACA backers had hoped. 
 At the individual level, the ACA mandated nutrition labeling to nudge 
consumers to maintain healthier weights. But Baum 71 quotes Andrea 
Freeman as noting that governments have confl icting goals and simultane-
ously nudge consumers in opposite directions. The USDA, Freeman says, 
can nudge consumers toward healthier food via nutrition guidelines while 
nudging them in the opposite direction by subsidizing unhealthy foods. 
 Casey Mulligan 72 details how the ACA’s employer and individual man-
dates depress both wages and employment. ACA supporters have argued 
that neither feature is literally a mandate. Employers are not required to 
provide employees with health insurance; instead, they can pay penal-
ties. The individual mandate was similarly structured in the law, and the 
Supreme Court, ruling in  NFIB v Sebelius , recrafted the choice as pur-
chase insurance or pay a tax. [We will add that, as with the large-soda ban 
described above, some would call these provisions nudges, while others 
would view them as coercive. As with the sodas, the delineation is ulti-
mately subjective.] 
 Abdukadirov notes that encouragement can turn to coercion. Writing 
of New York City’s ban on large sodas:
 nudges can easily turn to shoves. With nudges, policymakers suggest better 
choices but ultimately leave the decision up to the individuals. Yet, some 
policymakers do not stop there. They argue that if people are irrational, it 
is the government’s responsibility to constrain individual choices. New York 
City Mayor Bloomberg’s decision to ban large soda drinks, since declared 
unconstitutional by the state Supreme Court’s Appellate Division, is a prime 
example. 73 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 305
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 There were a good many reasons to be skeptical of centralized reg-
ulation during the twentieth century. Hayek’s classic statement was 
that central planners could never absorb and process the myriad bits of 
knowledge spread across millions of individuals. 74 Hayek’s logic under-
lay much of what became the public choice literature. 75 It also infl uenced 
some on the political left. An example is Steven Johnson, a “peer pro-
gressive” suspicious of central planning, who cites Hayek as an inspira-
tion. 76 Johnson believes that networks of people (“peers”) are better 
at collective decision- making than are centralized experts. This view is 
refl ected also in Surowiecki, who catalogs the triumphs of networked 
laymen over credentialed experts. Surowiecki acknowledges the positive 
role of government and corporate command-and-control innovation, 
but notes: “in the history of science and technology, top-down orga-
nization has always been more of an anomaly than the ordinary way of 
doing business.” 77 
 But Graboyes notes that the capacity of centralized planners may have 
dimmed considerably in the Internet Age. Hayek described the diffi culty 
central planners have in absorbing information that is dispersed among 
millions of individuals. But he was writing in an era when information 
was (compared with now) scarce. Today, information is super-abundant; 
it travels peer-to-peer across the Web and other conduits; and much of 
it never passes through the planner’s central hub. Discussing regulation, 
Graboyes makes the following analogy:
 imagine an early 20th century market town, with multiple roads feeding all 
traffi c through the center of town. This works quite well as long as the num-
ber of horse-drawn wagons and slow-moving automobiles are few and far- 
between. But deep into the Automobile Age, this perfectly well-designed 
traffi c pattern clogs into maddening jams. And when an emergency occurs, 
traffi c draws to a standstill. … With the market town, the answer is to recon-
fi gure the hub-and-spoke roads into a more fl exible grid of alternative nodes 
and routes, with commerce dispersed across the landscape. 78 
 But the nudge does the opposite. It assumes that the necessary informa-
tion will fl ow through the central hub—whether for mandates or nudges. 
But in the twenty-fi rst century, medical data, goods, and services increas-
ingly fl ow through decentralized networks. The Internet, low-cost health 
care technologies, and inexpensive travel make it far more diffi cult for 
central authorities to monitor and infl uence health care. 
306 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Some examples are: 
 23andMe. 79  For $99, this California company analyzes an individual’s 
DNA and provides information on roughly 250 genetic conditions and 
familial connections with other 23andMe users. The FDA barred 23andMe 
from providing consumers with genetic information other than genealogi-
cal data. In contrast, the UK 80 allowed the company to sell its full range of 
products. Can one get the forbidden scan while traveling in the UK? Can 
one get the results in the USA by mailing the sample to a friend in Great 
Britain? (Note: 23andMe has tentatively resumed sale of genetic informa-
tion in the USA, but only on low-risk conditions). 81 
 PatientsLikeMe. 82  This is a crowdsourcing website that allows individu-
als to share information about their symptoms, illnesses, treatments, and 
other experiences. The site has been used to organize research trials. 
 FitBit 83 and more.  Wearable health care telemetry is now inexpensive, 
light, and largely beyond the purview of medical professionals and govern-
ments. Recently, parents have programmed smartphones to monitor their 
children’s insulin pumps 84 from afar. 
 3D-printed prosthetic hands.  The e-NABLE consortium 85 uses social 
media to connect individuals needing prosthetic hands with individuals 
wishing to manufacture such hands. The hands are manufactured for $50 
or less and distributed peer to peer. 
 WebMD. 86  Medical consultation sites are proliferating across the web. 
 Medical tourism. 87  Increasingly, Americans are going to other countries to 
receive medical care. 
 Telemedicine.  Companies like Doctor on Demand 88 can provide medical 
examinations via smartphone and tablet, though state laws in the USA 
restrict the use of such services. Telemedicine companies are active in 
other countries, and it remains to be seen whether it is possible to control 
cross-border use of such services. 
 3D-printed drugs.  The FDA recently approved 89 the fi rst 3D-printed 
drugs. The possibility exists that 3D printers, the Internet, and  open-source 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 307
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 software will make it relatively inexpensive and private to produce  elaborate 
pharmaceuticals in garage labs. 
 Biohacking.  At the radical end of health care, “biohackers” conduct pro-
cedures unintermediated by medical professionals. These include surgi-
cal procedures and other alterations of human bodies.  Nature recently 
reported in the possibility of amateurs performing gene splicing. 90 
 The common thread in these and myriad other cutting-edge procedures 
is that they remove signifi cant chunks of health care from the purview of 
centralized experts. In such an environment, it is diffi cult for the central 
hub (e.g., FDA) to monitor behavior, estimate individual reactions, and 
track results. In such an environment, can the central authorities estimate 
how nudges will affect populations or, retrospectively, determine whether 
or not they worked? 
 A particular challenge is that much information is now partitioned into 
micro-demographics. A generation ago, most of us communicated and 
obtained information through the same routes. Today, islets of communi-
cation are largely isolated within groups divided by age, gender, ethnicity, 
tastes, geography, and so forth. Paradoxically, the vastly increased amount 
of information available to all individuals has tended to compartmentalize 
our sources by demographic group. 
 Finkelstein and Zuckerman document the extent to which obesity is 
correlated with ethnicity. 91 If one designs nudges to combat obesity, does 
one design separate nudges for each ethnic community and other socio- 
economic communities? It is worth noting that nudges which impact eth-
nicities differently may come to be perceived as discriminatory. People 
are inherently different and will therefore respond to nudges in different 
manners. Should nudges be allowed to persist if their effectiveness can dif-
fer widely based on who encounters it? 
 The central fact that joins all of these developments is this: The IT 
revolution has changed the fundamental nature of specialized information 
in society. Google CEO Eric Schmidt said in 2010, “Every two days now 
we create as much information as we did from the dawn of civilization up 
until 2003.” Schmidt noted that the sources of this information are highly 
decentralized—user-generated data. He added, “I spend most of my time 
assuming the world is not ready for the technology revolution that will be 
happening to them soon.” 92 
 From the FDA’s inception until the late twentieth century, the agency 
was mostly concerned with regulating technologies that were big, heavy, 
308 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

expensive, visible, traceable, complex to operate, and produced by people 
in the FDA’s Rolodex. An archetypical device of this era would be an MRI 
unit made by, say, Philips; there were no hobbyist MRIs built in garages. 
In contrast, the dominant twenty-fi rst century technologies may be more 
like the smartphone-based insulin pump monitor mentioned above. In 
that case, a layman unknown to the FDA rigged up a powerful device at 
little cost, operated it himself, and in doing so, created no visible fi nancial 
trail. With little diffi culty, he could pass it along to friends (or customers) 
outside of the purview of regulators. 
 Furthermore, the cost of life-changing technologies is plummeting. In 
the early 2000s, sequencing a human genome cost around $3 billion. A 
little over a decade later, the cost had dropped to under $1,000. 93 With 
Moore’s Law proceeding apace, the cost of a full sequence may drop in 
a few years to a few dollars. That, plus low-cost, omnipresent statistical 
software vastly expands the potential for decentralized discovery of con-
nections between genes and health. With data and devices fl owing peer 
to peer, Moore’s Law becomes amplifi ed by Metcalfe’s Law (the value of 
a network is proportional to the square of the number of connected par-
ticipants). If that is the case, consumers and producers will have a much 
greater incentive to ignore or defy the incentives that government plan-
ners seek to implement. 
 If 23andMe and e-NABLE and their successors can radically improve 
consumers’ lives for small costs, will centrally planned regulations and 
nudges have the impacts their authors desire? Can the FDA effectively 
regulate (or even nudge) a world where massive volumes of data fl ow 
through a shifting mosaic of micro-demographics? 
 CONCLUSION 
 We have argued that health care nudges blend components of behavioral 
economics, medical paternalism, and Progressivism. 
 We raise questions of whether the ostensibly voluntaristic nature of 
nudges separates them from more coercive actions of the state: whether 
nudges are truly voluntary, effi cacious, or inherently political. 
 We reiterate that the small effects of individual nudges makes them 
harder targets for analysis than big, sweeping social institutions—but the 
nudges still matter. 
 We’ll close with Lee Harris’s eloquent critique of nudges and the phi-
losophy behind them:
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 309
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Perhaps Daniel Kahneman should add another cognitive bias to his list—a 
bias that doesn’t affect ordinary individuals very much, but which has always 
had a profoundly distorting effect on the judgments and decisions made 
by intellectuals, namely, an irrational infatuation with abstract theories and 
utopian ideals, despite the demonstrable fact that such theories and ideals, 
when put into practice, have inevitably failed to improve the human lot and 
in many cases have led to complete disaster. The small irrationalities of our 
daily individual lives, so well documented by Kahneman, can never damage 
society as much as the grandiose rationality of centralized planners—a vital 
truth that our generation seems to have forgotten, but of which Obamacare 
is rapidly reminding us. 94 
 NOTES 
 1. “U.S. Food and Drug Administration.” U S Food and Drug 
Administration Home Page. 2002. Accessed August 31, 2015. 
 2. The most infamous case in history was the thalidomide disaster of the 
late 1950s and early 1960s, see Jack Botting, “The History of 
Thalidomide,”  Drug News & Perspectives (Impact Factor: 3.13) 15(9) 
(12/2002): 604–611. 
 3. Effi cacy was added as an approval standard in 1962: US Food and 
Drug Administration. FDA, “Signifi cant dates in US food and drug 
law history.” (2014). 
 4. Milton Friedman and Rose D. Friedman, “Who Protects the 
Consumers?” in  Free to Choose :  A Personal Statement . Harvest. ed. 
(Harvest House, 1980), 203–210. 
 5. Alex Tabarrok, “The FDA and International Reciprocity,”  Marginal 
REVOLUTION November 19, 2013. Accessed August 31, 2015. 
 6. Robert Graboyes, “Island Hoping and Leapfrogging,” in  Fortress and 
Frontier in American Health Care (Arlington: Mercatus Center at 
George Mason University, 2014). 
 7. Baron William Thomas, Lecture, London, May 3, 1883. 
 8. Erik Angner,  A Course in Behavioral Economics (Houndmills: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2012). 
 9. Milton Friedman,  Essays in Positive Economics (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1970), 3–43. 
 10. Thomas Gale Moore, “Reformulation of Microecon,” Reformulation 
of Microecon.2014.  http://web.stanford.edu/~moore/Evolution-
aryEconomics.html . Additional literature description can be found 
here: Robert Graboyes,  Why We Want What We Want (2012).  http://
www.robertgraboyes.com/writings_fi les/WWWWWW.pdf 
310 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 11. Steven Pinker,  How the Mind Works . Kindle edition (New York: 
Norton, 1997), 395. 
 12. Schelling cited in Pinker, ibid, p. 395. 
 13. Owen Jones uses the term “time shifted rationality” to express this idea. 
 14. David Friedman,  Economics and Evolutionary Psychology (na, 2004). 
 15. Steven Pinker,  How the Mind Works . Kindle edtion (New York: 
Norton, 1997), 395. 
 16. Schelling cited in Pinker, ibid, p. 395. 
 17. Robin Hanson, “Showing That You Care: The Evolution of Health 
Altruism,”  Medical Hypotheses 70(4) (2008): 724–742. 
 18. Kahneman, a psychologist and sharp critic of neoclassical economics, 
won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for his work. 
 19. Daniel Kahneman,  Thinking ,  Fast and Slow (Macmillan Kindle 
Edition, 2011). 
 20. Robert Graboyes, “…And Why What We Want Bugs Economists,” 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Equilibria #7. 2001/02.  http://
www.robertgraboyes.com/writings_fi les/Bugs%20Economists.pdf 
 21. Kahneman, op cit, p. 5. 
 22. Ibid, p. 411. 
 23. Ibid, p. 412. 
 24. Ibid. 
 25. Rothman, A. J., Bartels, R. D., Wlaschin, J., & Salovey, P. (2006). 
The strategic use of gain- and loss-framed messages to promote 
healthy behavior: How theory can inform practice.  Journal of 
Communication, 56 , S202–S220; Rothman, A. J., & Salovey, P. 
(1997). Shaping perceptions to motivate healthy behavior: The role 
of message framing.  Psychological Bulletin, 121(1) , 3–19. 
 26. Alan Schwartz, Julie Goldberg, and Gordon Hazen, “Prospect 
Theory, Reference Points, and Health Decisions,” Judgment and 
Decision Making 3(2) (2008): 174–180. 
 27. A. M. Apanovitch, D. McCarthy, and P. Salovey, “Using Message 
Framing to Motivate HIV Testing Among Low-Income, Ethnic 
Minority Women,”  Health Psychology - Hillsdale -, 22 (2003): 60–67. doi: 
10.1037/0278-6133.22.1.60; A. Moxey, D. O’Connell, P. McGettigan, 
D. Henry. “Describing Treatment Effects to Patients: How They Are 
Expressed Makes a Difference,”  Journal of General Internal Medicine 
18(11) (2003): 948–959.; S. E. Rivers, P. Salovey, D. A. Pizarro, J. 
Pizarro, and T. R. Schneider, Message Framing and Pap Test Utilization 
Among Women Attending a Community Health Clinic,”  Journal of 
Health Psychology 10 (2005): 65–77. doi: 10.1177/1359105305048556. 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 311
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 28. Eric Topol.  The Patient Will See You Now :  The Future of Medicine Is 
in Your Hands (Basic Books Kindle Edition, 2015). 
 29. Richard Gordon,  Doctor in the House (Penguin, 1961). 
 30. Topol, op cit, p. 18. 
 31. Ibid, p. 21. 
 32. Ibid, p. 21. 
 33. Ibid. 
 34. Ibid, p. 22. 
 35. Ibid, 22ff. 
 36. “Paternalism: Does It Still Have a Place in Modern Medical Practice?” 
AHC Media Continuing Medical Education Publishing RSS. August 
1, 2010.  http://www.ahcmedia.com/articles/19883-paternalism-
does-it-still-have-a-place-in-modern-medical-practice 
 37. Lewis Thomas,  Fragile Species (Simon and Schuster, 1996). 
 38. Herman L. Blumgart, “Caring for the Patient,”  The New England 
Journal of Medicine 270 (1964): 449–456. 
 39. Thomas, op cit. 
 40. Kenneth J. Arrow, “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of 
Medical Care,”  The American Economic Review (1963): 941–973. 
 41. Avik Roy, “The Gospel According to Ken Arrow,”  National Review 
Online, August 30, 2010. 
 42. “Teddy Roosevelt and Progressivism.” Slavery by another Name. 
PBS.  http://www.pbs.org/tpt/slavery-by-another-name/themes/
progressivism/ 
 43. US Food and Drug Administration, “ Federal Food and Drugs Act of 
1906,”  US Department of Health and Human Services 20 (2009). 
 44. Anne-Emanuelle Birn, Theodore M. Brown, Elizabeth Fee, and 
Walter J. Lear, “Struggles for National Health Reform in the United 
States,”  American Journal of Public Health 93(1) (2003): 86–91. 
 45. Ibid. 
 46. Op cit., Effi cacy was added as an approval standard in 1962: US Food 
and Drug Administration. FDA, “Signifi cant dates in US food and 
drug law history.” (2014),  http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/
WhatWeDo/History/Milestones/ucm128305.htm 
 47. Milton Friedman and Rose Friedman,  Free to Choose :  A Personal 
Statement (Houghton Miffl in Harcourt, 1990), 240. 
 48. Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein,  Nudge :  Improving Decisions 
About Health ,  Wealth ,  and Happiness (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2008). 
312 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 49. “Homo Economicus Defi nition | Investopedia.” Investopedia. 
November 20, 2003. 
 50. Thaler and Sunstein, op cit, Part III 
 51. These and other topics are covered in: Christina A. Roberto and 
Ichiro Kawachi (eds.)  Behavioral Economics and Public Health 
(Oxford University Press, 2015). 
 52. Milton Friedman, Rose Friedman, and Free To Choose,  A Personal 
Statement (Secker and Warburg, 1980). 
 53. Thaler and Sunstein, op cit, p. 5. 
 54. Kashmir Hill, “Facebook Manipulated 689,003 Users’ Emotions For 
Science,”  Forbes , June 28, 2014. 
 55. Oliver Burkeman, “How Bloomberg’s Soda Ban Is a Classic Example 
of ‘Choice Architecture’,”  The Guardian, July 12, 2012. 
 56. Richard Thaler, Twitter Post. May 31, 2012, 4:06 PM.  https://twit-
ter.com/R_Thaler/status/208273339507150849 
 57. “Food Pyramids and Plates: What Should You Really Eat?” The 
Nutrition Source.  http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/
pyramid-full-story/ 
 58. Paul R. Marantz, Elizabeth D. Bird, and Michael H. Alderman, “A 
Call for Higher Standards of Evidence for Dietary Guidelines,” 
 American Journal of Preventive Medicine 34(3) (2008): 234–240. 
 59. Rajiv Chowdhury, Samantha Warnakula, Setor Kunutsor, Francesca 
Crowe, Heather A. Ward, Laura Johnson, Oscar H. Franco, Adam S. 
Butterworth, Nita G. Forouhi, Simon G. Thompson, Kay-Tee Khaw, 
Dariush Mozaffarian, John Danesh, and Emanuele Di Angelantonio, 
“Association of Dietary, Circulating, and Supplement Fatty Acids 
with Coronary Risk. A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis,”  Annals 
of Internal Medicine 160(6) (2014): 398–407. 
 60. Andrew Dugan, “Americans Still Avoid Fat More Than Carbs.” 
 Gallup.com . July 29, 2014. 
 61. “H.R. 3562—101st Congress (1989–1990): Nutrition Labeling and 
Education Act of 1990.” Accessed November 2, 2015. 
 62. See maps at “Obesity Prevalence Maps.” Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention. September 11, 2015. 
 63. Eric A. Finkelstein, Kiersten L. Strombot, Nadine L. Chan, and James 
Krieger, “Mandatory Menu Labeling in One Fast-Food Chain in King 
County, Washington,”  American Journal of Preventive Medicine 40(2) 
(2011): 122–7. Brian Elbel, Rogan Kersh, Victoria L. Brescoll, and L. 
Beth Dixon, “Calorie Labeling and Food Choices: A First Look at the 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 313
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Effects on Low-Income People in New York City,”  Health Affairs 
28(6) (2009): w1110–w1121. And Bryan Bollinger, Phillip Leslie, 
and Alan Sorensen.  Calorie Posting in Chain Restaurants . No. 
w15648. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010. 
 64. Alla Katsnelson, “Lab Animals and Pets Face Obesity Epidemic.” 
 Nature.com . November 24, 2010. 
 65. See, for example, Stew Smith, “U.S. Troops Too Fat to Fight?” 
 Military.com . 
 66. Lee Harris, “When Nudge Comes to Shove.” AEI. November 13, 
2013. 
 67. Ibid. 
 68. Ibid. 
 69. Ibid. 
 70. Matthew Baum, “Potential Problems and Limits of Nudges in Health 
Care,”  Bill of Health , May 2, 2014. 
 71. Ibid. 
 72. Casey Mulligan, “The ACA’s Unintended Consequences,”  City 
Journal , May 14, 2015. 
 73. Sherzod Abdukadirov, “When ‘Nudge’ Comes to Shove,”  US News , 
August 12, 2013. 
 74. Friedrich August Hayek, “The Use of Knowledge in Society.” (1945). 
 75. For example, James M. Buchanan,  The Limits of Liberty :  Between 
Anarchy and Leviathan . No. 714. University of Chicago Press, 1975. 
 76. Steven Johnson,  Future Perfect :  The Case for Progress in a Networked 
Age (Penguin UK, 2012). 
 77. James Surowiecki,  The Wisdom of Crowds (New York: Anchor, 2005), 
163. 
 78. Robert Graboyes, “Why We Need to Liberate America’s Health 
Care,”  PBS , January 9, 2015. 
 79. “23andMe—Genetic Testing for Ancestry.” 23andMe. 2015. 
 https://www.23andme.com / 
 80. Ronald Bailey, “23andMe Gene Test Banned by FDA Is Now 
Available in the U.K.”  Reason.com . December 4, 2014. 
 81.  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/853481 
 82.  https://www.patientslikeme.com/ 
 83. “There’s a Fitbit Product for Everyone.” Fitbit Offi cial Site for 
Activity Trackers & More. 2015.  https://www.fi tbit.com / 
 84. Dan Hurley, “Diabetes Patients Are Hacking Their Way Toward a 
Bionic Pancreas.”  Wired.com . December 24, 2014. 
314 
R. GRABOYES AND J. CARGES
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 85. Jen Owen, “Enabling The Future.” Enabling The Future, September 
12, 2015.  http://enablingthefuture.org / 
 86. “WebMD—Better Information. Better Health.” WebMD.  http://
www.webmd.com / 
 87. “Medical Tourism Association—Medical Travel & Health Tourism: 
Medical Tourism Association.”  http://www.medicaltourismassocia-
tion.com/en/index.html 
 88. “Urgent Care Doctors & Psychologists—Doctor On Demand.” 
Doctor On Demand.  http://doctorondemand.com 
 89. Robinson Meyer, “3-D Printed Drugs Are Here,”  The Atlantic, 
August 19, 2015. 
 90. Heidi Ledford, “Biohackers Gear Up for Genome Editing.”  Nature.
com . August 26, 2015. 
 91. Eric A. Finkelstein and Laurie Zuckerman,  The Fattening of America : 
 How the Economy Makes Us Fat ,  If It Matters ,  and What To Do About 
It (John Wiley & Sons, 2010). 
 92. M. G. Siegler, “Eric Schmidt: Every 2 Days We Create As Much 
Information As We Did Up To 2003,”  TechCrunch.com , August 4, 
2010, 
accessed 
November 
6, 
2015. 
 http://techcrunch.
com/2010/08/04/schmidt-data/ 
 93. Antonio Regalado, “EmTech: Illumina Says 228,000 Human 
Genomes Will Be Sequenced This Year,”  TechnologyReview.com , 
September 24, 2014, accessed November 6, 2015.  http://www.tech-
nologyreview.com/news/531091/emtech-illumina-says-
228000-human-genomes-will-be-sequenced-this-year/ 
 94. Harris, op cit. 
NUDGES IN HEALTH CARE 315
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

317
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1_12
 Conclusion: Behavioral Economics 
and Policy Interventions 
 Richard   Williams 
 The purpose of this book is to demonstrate that there is a strong pri-
vate sector that helps people’s decision making and that stringent criteria 
ought to be met before governments attempt to improve on private deci-
sion making, whether through structuring information to “nudge” people 
into making the government-preferred decision or using more stringent 
measures to achieve the same thing. Where people have diffi culty match-
ing their inherent preferences into real life decisions that satisfy those pref-
erences, a private market will almost always arise that can help to match 
decisions with preferences. 
 There are two issues related to the use of behavioral economics in pol-
icy discussed in this book and they are used without always distinguishing 
them. The fi rst is how the fi ndings of behavioral economics are used to 
justify a new policy. One primary justifi cation for government policies, 
particularly government regulation, has been required by an Executive 
Order going back nearly two decades that regulations are needed “to 
interpret the law, or are made necessary by compelling public need, such 
as material failures of private markets to protect or improve the health and 
safety of the public, the environment, or the well-being of the American 
 R.  Williams () 
 Mercatus Center at  George Mason University ,  Arlington ,  VA ,  USA 
 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

people.” 1 The economic rationale contained in that order (still in force) 
suggests that a rule is needed to correct failures of private  markets , not 
 personal failures. Even if other parts of the order might be construed to 
suggest correcting personal failures, they should be of such magnitude as 
to be a “compelling public need.” 
 The second use of behavioral economics in policy, as originally con-
strued in the book  Nudge by Thaler and Sunstein, is to construct less 
onerous remedies when there is a compelling public need. 2 The idea is to 
choose a policy option that provides people with well-ordered information 
that helps them match their inherent preferences with their actual choices. 
Rather than mandating reallocation of resources through product bans or 
mandated expenditures, the same goals might be accomplished by simply 
helping people to make choices aligned with what they might choose if 
they were perfectly rational. But when more stringent measures are chosen 
based on rationales using behavioral economic fi ndings, these are no lon-
ger informational nudges but rather the older form of paternalism. 
 So there are several possibilities for the use of behavioral economics in 
policy. A fi nding of personal decision failures can be a rationale for policy, 
and we can either have a structured information remedy or a more strin-
gent, paternalistic policy to remedy those failures. For example, suppose 
the decision failure is determined to be that consumers are shortsighted 
and do not choose cars that get high enough gas mileage. The remedy 
could be to structure the information that they receive about gas mileage 
in a way that nudges them toward higher mileage cars or the issue could 
be forced by ordering car manufacturers to make more fuel effi cient cars. 
Identifi cation of the problem uses behavioral economics and providing 
structured information would also use behavioral economics. The remedy 
to order changes in how cars are produced is just paternalistic. 
 Finally, there are some issues associated with the relatively new science 
of behavioral economics itself. Much of the research has been generated 
in laboratory experiments, and it is not always clear that these fi ndings 
manifest themselves in real world situations. And, as will be discussed 
further on, there is the misguided notion that somehow behavioral eco-
nomics repairs what is wrong with the simplistic assumptions associated 
with neoclassical economics that assumes perfectly rational participants. 
This assumption is made in neoclassical economics to predict population 
behavior; it is neither a prediction nor a prescription for individuals. 
 Several authors in this volume take on the charge that behavioral eco-
nomics remedies an inherent weakness in neoclassical economics where 
318 
R. WILLIAMS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

the supposed weakness is the assumption that consumers and producers 
make perfectly rational and fully informed decisions always and every-
where. Mario Rizzo argues that the so-called assumptions of neoclassical 
theories were not prescriptions for how people ought to behave or even 
assumptions that they did behave that way, they were used to construct 
a theory that would have some predictive power. Adam Smith and Todd 
Zywicki point out that anyone that does believe in perfect rationality 
doesn’t truly understand how markets work as they (markets) are “the 
product of an evolutionary, unguided process (and) it’s not surprising that 
it little resembles the telltale fantasies of neoclassical theory.” 
 Given the issues associated with the new science of behavioral econom-
ics and the enthusiasm that seems to be building to use it as a justifi cation 
for new policies, there is an urgent need to consider when and where it 
is appropriate. The use of benefi t-cost analysis dates back at least to 1978 
(President Carter’s Executive Order 12044) and attempts to set guide-
lines on where the federal government should use economic analysis to 
determine when regulations are necessary and what form they should take. 
These orders have been reinforced by every president since. To date, there 
has been no guidance with respect to the use of behavioral economics for 
government policies. Contrasting this failure is the fact that the Carter 
order, and every subsequent order has been informed by the century long 
theory associated with neoclassical economics. 
 For example, the case is made that we must take control of the dietary 
habits of overweight people because we have assumed collective responsibil-
ity for their health. That, of course, is a government choice, not a market 
choice so it is hard to argue that this represents a market failure, only per-
sonal failures. Given the exhaustive list of personal failures that the behavioral 
psychologists have identifi ed there is no doubt much more work envisioned 
beyond making us thinner. So far we have apparently failed at choosing the 
correct cars, air conditioners, heat pumps, microwave ovens, refrigerators, 
and mortgages. What are the limits to government involvement using this 
theory? For example, given that over half of all marriages end in divorce, is a 
nudge in our future towards choosing a perfect match as seen by the Bureau 
of Marital Bliss within the Department of Health and Human Services? 
 On the other hand, if there are insuffi cient market incentives to help us 
make better decisions about problems that lead to irreversible effects (like 
fatal mistakes or failing to save enough for retirement) and there are poor 
market mechanisms that are not working, then there are good reasons 
to use this theory to fashion remedies. For example, the Social Security 
CONCLUSION 319
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

Administration has used behavioral economics to help frame the decision 
as to when to start taking benefi ts. 3 
 From the 1950s on, market failure was supposed to be the economic 
justifi cation for intervening in markets. 4 That rationale has been side-
stepped in many cases as agencies either ignore the requirement or just 
hypothesize about the existence of a market failure without data to back 
it up. 5 
 Mario Rizzo argues in this volume that there are four conditions, all 
of which must be satisfi ed, in order to use behavioral economics to justify 
policy:
 1.  There must be some agreed-upon criteria for what would be welfare 
enhancing behavior. 
 2.  We can observe real life examples where people (presumably a lot of 
people) are violating that behavior. 
 3.  Policymakers can correct that behavior toward the right behavior. 
 4.  We cannot do so without high costs of resources or liberty. 
 Professor Rizzo argues that it is extremely unlikely that all of these can 
be satisfi ed for most real world situations. 
 Many factors cast doubt on the ability of behavioral economics to solve 
a large variety of policy problems. These include: (1) the importance of 
decision errors as a learning mechanism; (2) the heterogeneous nature of 
public policy decisions; (3) unintended consequences of nudge policies; 
and (4) the fact that private markets generally perform better than govern-
ment nudges. Each of these issues will be examined in turn. 
 DECISION ERRORS AS A LEARNING MECHANISM 
 One of the fi rst things a government regulator should do when begin-
ning to design a regulation is “identify the desired outcome.” 6 Suppose 
we imagine that we are just beginning the entire enterprise of intervening 
in markets using behavioral economics. The desired outcome could be 
construed as preventing people from making mistakes–that is, ensuring 
that outcomes of individual actions are consistent with their underlying 
preferences. Given the enormous number of categories of mistakes people 
make (well over 100), 7 it’s not too hard to imagine that the program 
might include all mistakes humans make. If they are successful, what will 
success look like? 
320 
R. WILLIAMS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 In the  Time Machine , the great science fi ction book written by 
H.G. Wells in 1895, the world is divided into two classes of people in 
the distant future. The fi rst group encountered are the Eloi, who live 
above ground and have all of their needs met, including shelter, food, 
and clothing. Their needs are provided by the second group, the under-
ground dwellers known as the Morlocks. For the price of their labors serv-
ing the Eloi, the Morlocks extract a payment by periodically eating some 
of the Eloi. The observer of this state, known only as the Time Traveler, 
fi rst observes the Eloi and believes he may be observing humanity fi nally 
achieving Utopia as they seem to live in a blissful state with all of their 
needs met. But later on he begins to seriously doubt whether this society 
is truly utopian. His doubts about utopia were not at fi rst about cannibal-
ism, they were about the “blissful” lives of the Eloi. 
 He comments on the supposedly idyllic Eloi, whereby “The too-per-
fect security of the Upper-worlders had led them to a slow movement of 
degeneration, to a general dwindling in size, strength and intelligence.” 8 
The Time Traveler notes that they do not ask questions, nor experiment 
and reminds his guests in the nineteenth century that experimenting (trial 
and error) is the only way man learns and develops. Ultimately, the Time 
Traveler begins to doubt his initial Utopia hypothesis, that freedom from 
want, from choice, and most particularly for our purposes, from mistakes, 
represents an ideal life. 
 The goal of those who would use behavioral economics appears to be 
the same as the Morlocks, to remove the ability of people to make mis-
takes, which simultaneously has the unwanted consequence of preventing 
them from learning from those mistakes. Over time, perhaps their intel-
ligence and curiosity will dwindle and they will not question the taxes they 
pay and the cost of regulatory activity behind the efforts of behavioral 
economic planners. 
 We know that experimenting is natural to humans. Anyone who has 
ever watched a fi ve-month-old baby sees learning by experimenting. Give 
the child an interesting object and she will perform hundreds of experi-
ments with it every minute using hands, feet, and mouth to try to discern 
what can be done with it and what is the most satisfying way to do it. 
 Golf is the same way for adults. Poor golfers who don’t really under-
stand the beauty of the game will hit a shot that ends up in a bad lie and 
then want to move the ball. If the golfer cheats and improves his lie, he has 
just lost what is so great about golf: every single swing is different and you 
get to try different things to see what works. The variations are infi nite. 
CONCLUSION 321
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

After all, you must account for your own condition; are you stiff, did you 
lift weights the day before or lift several drinks; how strong is the wind, 
how constant, in what direction; is your ball on a slope, up, down left or 
right, and by how much; what is the consistency of the grass or whatever 
surface you have landed upon; how far do you need to hit, what is the ball 
likely to land on; where are the hazards and how can they be avoided? The 
combinations are endless and, although lessons help, everyone’s mental 
ability, knowledge, and physical builds and skill levels are different. It is a 
game where there is no such thing as perfect, you try to both minimize 
and make “smaller” mistakes. 
 Perhaps the government doesn’t care about the decision heuristics that 
falsely improve your golf score but suppose they did and they found that 
golfers in fact make mental mistakes. In the movie “The Greatest Game Ever 
Played” the ten-year-old caddie, Eddie Lowery, reminds the young ama-
teur, Francis Ouimet, playing his fi rst US Open as an amateur that the worst 
thing he can do is watch the pro and try and duplicate his shot, particularly 
as there is no way to know where the pro, Harry Vardon, has actually hit 
the ball. Young Eddie knows that Francis should play his own game against 
the course. While Eddie appears to be nudging him away from a mental 
mistake, mostly Eddie just encourages Francis with such pithy remarks on 
putting as, “Read ‘em, roll ‘em, and hole ‘em.” Eddie understands that 
Francis is learning by himself how to play the game at a new level. 
 We make countless mistakes in golf and that is why many have said the 
game is “90 %” mental. Given that we are making mistakes and learning 
constantly, could government bureaucrats nudge us into a better game? 
Most likely, any nudge would be one more factor the golfer would have to 
overcome as he continues his quest for the unattainable, the perfect game. 
 Adam Thierer’s chapter makes the point that learning occurs at “per-
sonal, organizational and societal” levels and that “when we fail, we learn 
a great deal from it.” But behavioral economics paternalism appears to 
follow the precautionary model that: “interrupts (the) learning process 
and leaves us more vulnerable to the most serious problems we face as 
individuals or a society.” In fact, as Mark White points out, nudges act to 
prevent us from learning because: “Nudges do not engage people’s ratio-
nal deliberative faculties, however, but instead subvert them, relying on 
cognitive biases and dysfunction to circumvent rational choice.” Perhaps 
not all nudges do this as sometimes they draw attention to something you 
ought to think about, such as when to opt out, but many surreptitiously 
do your thinking for you. 
322 
R. WILLIAMS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 Given that we want people to learn from mistakes even when these con-
ditions are met, we should also take into account the amount of regret that 
would ensue from a poor decision. That is, if a decision doesn’t cause irre-
versible harm, and people can learn from their decisions, then an interven-
tion is likely to make things worse by eliminating the learning component. 
 THE HETEROGENEOUS NATURE OF PUBLIC PREFERENCES 
 The next problem that affl icts all regulations (not just those motivated by 
behavioral economics) is the inherent differences in what we value and 
how we make decisions. Because we are all different with different needs, 
wants, and preferences, when someone proclaims that they will do the 
thinking for everyone, it can be a problem. As Jodi Beggs says: “As the 
heterogeneity of the effect of a nudge increases, the social justifi cation for 
implementing such a nudge decreases.” Sofi e Miller and Brian Mannix 
quote from a National Bureau of Economic Research working paper that 
found that: “different consumer groups have vastly different discount 
rates for purchases of energy effi cient appliances.”This means that each 
consumer values energy savings over time differently, particularly as com-
pared to other characteristics of energy products so that there is no single 
rule that can positively affect everyone. 
 But even if everyone were alike, it is still a problem for planners to know 
people’s true preferences. A number of authors have cited the diffi culty 
of fi rst fi nding out preferences that people may not be able to accurately 
describe and that are constantly changing. So it’s not just the fact that we 
are different, it is impossible to actually know what preferences people 
have and attempts to nudge us may have unintended consequences. 
 UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF NUDGE POLICIES 
 Mark White in this volume goes back to an earlier era where John Stuart 
Mill proclaimed: “The strongest of all the arguments against the interfer-
ence of the public with purely personal conduct is that, when it does inter-
fere, the odds are that it interferes wrongly, and in the wrong place.” Mill 
may have been anticipating unintended consequences. Michael Marlow 
provides an example of these unintended consequences where past gov-
ernment nudges promoting diets rich in complex carbohydrates “may 
have unintentionally promoted obesity.” Similarly, Sherzod Abdukadirov 
notes that taxes on soda caused some to switch to beer. Just as with the 
CONCLUSION 323
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

heterogeneity problem, government planners fail far too often to examine 
the likely behavioral changes that result from their policies and the unin-
tended consequences of those policies. Of course, there may be positive 
as well as negative consequences, but failure to analyze and consider them 
leads to poor policies. 
 THE SLIPPERY SLOPE 
 One of the unintended consequences of embracing nudges for every kind 
of personal failure is that it is perceived as a policy failure when the “right” 
behavior is not adopted. In fact, new or restructured information may 
cause people to re-enforce their original choice. Without knowing pre-
cisely why consumers choose what they do, it is impossible to distinguish 
a policy effort that re-enforces a choice that is consistent with true con-
sumer preferences from a failed policy effort that does not achieve that. 
 In fact, there are those who favor these kinds of interventions but think 
that nudges are not enough, that more forceful policies are virtually always 
needed to change behavior. Professor Marlow distinguishes between two cat-
egories of paternalism commonly known as: “soft” paternalism and “hard” 
paternalism. If nudges are “easy and cheap” to avoid, they are soft paternal-
istic nudges. As Professor White mentions “mandates, bans, taxes and sub-
sidies” are the traditional (hard) paternalist tools. For some, moving down 
the policy severity slope is automatic as Smith and  Zywicki note, “Once a 
product or service is considered  non gratis , policymakers quickly move from 
subtly changing choice architecture to outright elimination of the service.” 
 Take one example covered in this book, the fact that far too many of 
us are overweight or obese, refl ecting what appears to be failure to make 
the correct choices favoring current hunger over future fatness. What is 
the goal of those who would use behavioral economics to “cure” obe-
sity, is it that everyone attains the perfect weight? As noted by Marlow in 
this volume, there is a $60 billion industry seeking to help us attain the 
enlightened weight and, in order to be profi table, they must be successful. 
So both the industry and, for that matter, consumers experiment to see 
what works. Hyper-connected consumers tell each other of their experi-
ments to see what is working and what is not. The Eloi, of course, do not 
need to do so as the Morlocks control their diets. Given the government 
movement that goes well beyond nudges to tax offending foods, control 
portion sizes or, in the case of the SNAP program, disallow certain foods, 
perhaps we are not too far off from the dependence of the Eloi. 
324 
R. WILLIAMS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 PRIVATE MARKETS GENERALLY PERFORM BETTER THAN 
GOVERNMENT NUDGES 
 Although some acknowledge that governments are not always perfectly 
rational, they continue to believe that, by using economic analysis and 
democratic processes, they are more likely than markets to provide people 
with good advice or impose measures that are good for them. Of course, 
while at least a few policies have the “rational” input of benefi t-cost anal-
ysis, most don’t. 9 Where personal decisions are concerned, the overall 
question is whether people (and fi rms) are more likely to make better deci-
sions with government nudges (and shoves) or with market participants 
addressing the same issues. 
 Of course, there are many differences between government and mar-
ket nudges. For example, Sherzod Abdukadirov points out that govern-
ment nudges have no feedback mechanisms so that, when something isn’t 
working or has unintended consequences, it can be easily altered. And, as 
Marlow points out: “Government choice architects do not face compara-
ble ‘market tests’ and thus face greater problems overcoming their imper-
fections,” which means that poor government products are not removed 
from the market. No doubt, once in place, government policies gain 
adherents who profi t from them and lobby to keep the policies in place. 
 In fact, while private marketers know exactly what behavior they are 
trying to get people to achieve, that’s not always clear with government 
policies. As Abdukadirov notes, what is the government trying to do when 
putting calorie counts on snack machines; get people to make healthier 
choices or walk away entirely? Or, as mentioned earlier, what is the goal 
overall, to make everyone’s weight perfect? 
 In addition, as a number of authors in this volume point out, govern-
ment agents exhibit the same biases as everyone else. But government 
agents have an additional shortcoming; they can also be under the infl u-
ence of interest groups who use the government to their own advantage. 
 Finally, fi rms must live or die by success or the lack of success, and 
fi rms must experiment and they get instant feedback on those experi-
ments. Governments do not and, even if they do, they need not heed 
the  feedback. Trying to infl uence consumers to make a change in their 
behavior is, for business, called marketing. And, as Mark White points 
out: “people  expect private companies—especially retailers, advertisers and 
marketers—to use whatever means they can to sell their products (outside 
of fraud).” 
CONCLUSION 325
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 This is the primary contribution of this volume, in virtually everything 
that we want to do in life, a market is formed to nudge, sway, or infl u-
ence us. In golf, there are countless books, programs, devices, videos, and 
experts all vying for your attention. It’s diffi cult to choose between all of 
the different forms of infl uence, which gives rise to another market, a mar-
ket that helps you select the best advice book. Go on the Web and search 
for “best _______” (fi ll in the blank) and there will be lots of sites that help 
you select the product that you want. A Google query on how to select 
the best retirement plan comes back with both private and public sugges-
tions. Some are clearly identifi able as attempts to sell a company’s services 
but not all. 10 Some come from companies that sell fi nancial magazines 11 
and some come from the government. 12 
 And the fact that there are lots of sites suggests there will be meta- 
markets, competitive on-line sites whose goal is to help choose other sites. 
Most of these Websites will rise and fall as time and experience sorts them 
out. As with any product, there is specialization to suit individual condi-
tions and preferences. Competition, including specialization, fi rms rising 
and falling based on merit, experimentation, and feedback, is the essence 
of what separates government from markets. 
 There is one thing that governments and markets share: confl icts of 
interest between the nudge supplier and consumers. There will not always 
be consonance between what profi t-oriented fi rms want customers to do 
and what is in the best interest of those customers. Jodi Beggs refers to 
nudges that are not good for consumers as “predatory nudges.”For exam-
ple, some gyms charge a low monthly fee but then discourage people from 
actually using the gym. Others purposefully make it diffi cult to cancel a 
contract. Of course, when government focuses on a single element of a 
product or a service such as energy effi ciency but ignores other attributes 
that could be considered a predatory nudge as well. Making government 
taxes less salient by hiding them could be considered just as much of a 
predatory nudge as shrouded bank fees. While competition in markets 
may ultimately drive out most predatory nudges, it is not clear that the 
voting process will do the same for government nudges. 
 The future for market nudges is machine algorithms that are tailored 
to us as individuals. Steve Wendel points out some of the best new devices 
in the consumer technology sphere that have been created to help peo-
ple make better decisions concerning their health and fi nance. To help 
us make better decisions, machine algorithms that are already present on 
our cell phones will be vast improvements over one-size-fi ts-all nudges. 13 
326 
R. WILLIAMS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

As Tyler Cowen writes, “Imagine using machine intelligence to guide our 
daily decisions. The iPhone program Siri, or some new version of her, tells 
Mary to dump John because he is a lying bastard. Another program tells 
you to sell your stocks or your home.” 14 It’s easy to imagine that every 
decision fl aw that behavioral economists point out could be remedied on 
an individualized basis vastly better by privately created algorithms. There 
are now dozens of apps for help with weight control and there are likely 
to be many more for dealing with banks, fi guring out paying points versus 
interest rates for mortgages, and virtually any decision people make. So 
just as behavioral economics takes off as a government policy tool, it is 
likely to rapidly become obsolete, an outdated policy remedy. 
 A lot of behavioral economics seems to be applied to nutrition, par-
ticularly to combat obesity. While there are machine algorithms like BMI 
Calculator and Lose It, the real future probably lies in making healthier 
foods that are also tastier. 15 One example is at the UK’s John Innes Centre, 
which created a tomato with a high level of antioxidants from snapdragon 
plants. 16 It has also created plants with extra vitamins, minerals, and rice 
with beta carotene. 17 
 What we are left with is yet another decision. Should we vote to allow 
governments to do their best to either nudge us into doing what’s best for 
us or, failing that, use more stringent measures to achieve these results? In 
some sense, it’s diffi cult to vote for these things; candidates represent all 
sorts of policy choices and, even if you think voting on government inter-
vening to correct private failures is a winner, it becomes more problemati-
cal when we have heterogeneous needs. 
 Or should we leave it to markets? Government and markets already 
compete to correct our decisions. The difference is that government 
policies are almost never reversible, whether they work or not, and they 
are coercive. On the other hand, the supply of nudges, algorithms, and 
technologies from the private sector is about making profi ts by infl uenc-
ing and satisfying private wants. They will not always be consistent with 
our true underlying preference but, importantly, they can be driven out 
of the market by competing products that are consistent. In the new 
 information age, consumers will instantly evaluate and share information 
on what works and what doesn’t. And the products developed in private 
markets can be individualized to a vastly greater degree than government 
policies. 
 Perhaps Lee Harris (quoted in this volume by Robert Graboyes) said 
it best, “The small irrationalities of our daily individual lives… can never 
CONCLUSION 327
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

damage society as much as the grandiose rationality of centralized plan-
ners—a vital truth that our generation seems to have forgotten…” In the 
end markets may simply outcompete governments to nudge us. Just like 
market failures, every personal failure is also a market opportunity. 18 
 NOTES 
 1. William J. Clinton, “Executive Order 12866, Regulator Planning and 
Review,” September 30, 1993. 
 2. Thaler, Richard and Cass Sunstein,  Nudge (Yale University Press, 
2008). 
 3. Social Security Administration, “When to Start Receiving Benefi ts,” 
SSA Publication No. 05-10147, ICN 480136, January 2014. 
 4. F. M. Bator, “The Anatomy of Market Failure,” QJE, 1958. 
 5. Jerry Ellig and James Broughel, “Regulation: What’s the Problem?” 
 Mercatus on Policy , November 21, 2011. 
 6. Jerry Ellig, “Ready, Fire, Aim!: A Foundational Problem with 
Regulations,” Mercatus Research Summary. 
 7. Wikipedia 
lists 
168 
at 
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
List_of_cognitive_biases 
 8. H. G. Well, The Time Machine, 1898, p. 158. 
 9. Richard Williams and James Brougel, “Government Report on 
Benefi ts and Costs of Federal Regulations Fails to Capture Full Impact 
of Rules,” Mercatus Center, December 02, 2013. 
 10.  http://www.accountingweb.com/practice/practice-excellence/
10-tips-on-selecting-the-right-retirement-plan-provider 
 11.  http://money.cnn.com/retirement/ 
 12.  http://www.irs.gov/Retirement-Plans/Help-with-Choosing-
a-Retirement-Plan 
 13. One site lists 25 apps that will help consumers save money:  http://
www.lifehack.org/articles/money/25-apps-that-will-save-you-lots-
money.html 
 14. Tyler Cowen,  Average Is Over (New York: Penguin Group, 2013), 
72. 
 15.  http://www.healthline.com/health-slideshow/top-iphone-android-
apps-weight-loss#7 
 16. Michael White, “Be a Good Kid and Eat Your GMO Vegetables,” 
Health and Behavior, Pacifi c Standard, July 1, 2013. 
328 
R. WILLIAMS
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

 17. WebMD, “GMO’s What You Need to Know,”  http://www.webmd.
com/food-recipes/truth-about-gmos?page=2 
 18. See, for example, Israel M. Kirzner, Competition and Entrepreneurship, 
rev. ed. (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2010 [1963]); Ludgwig Von 
Mises, Human Action: A Treatise on Economics, rev. ed. (Indianapolis: 
Liberty Fund, 2010 [1949]); Israel M. Kirzner, Market Theory and 
the Price System, rev. ed. (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2011 [1963]). 
CONCLUSION 329
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

331
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
S. Abdukadirov (ed.), Nudge Theory in Action, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-31319-1
 INDEX 
 A 
 A/B tests , 111 
 Abdukadirov, Sherzod , 5, 305, 
323–24, 325 
 ability, in CREATE model , 107–8 
 Abiogenix’s uBox pill reminder , 100 
 academic researchers 
 consumer technology design and , 
96–98 
 number of, in US , 114–15n5 
 randomized control trials of nudges 
by , 109 
 AdhereTech’s medication bottles , 182 
 Adobe Target , 111, 112 
 advertising 
 dietary fi ber education and , 232 
 market “failures” and , 228 
 nudges in , 104 
 Affordable Care Act (ACA) , 171–74, 
304–5, 310 
 Agriculture, Department of 
 Choose My Plate program , 198 
 Dietary Guidelines for Americans 
and , 204, 205, 303–4 
 Food Guide Pyramid , 204–5 
 incorrect nudges by , 213 
 Alcott, Hunt , 165–66, 272, 273 
 Allen, Woody , 146 
 Allianz Global Investors, PlanSuccess 
of , 149 
 Amazon.com, auto-renewal nudges , 
146 
 Ambient’s Energy Joule , 103 
 American Medical Association (AMA) , 
297 
 Andersen, Steffen , 262 
 Anderson, Stephen , 97 
 Annals of Internal Medicine , 
205, 303 
 Aon Hewitt, Quick Enrollment, for 
401(k) enrollment , 131 
 Apple 
 smart watches , 98 
 weight loss apps , 100, 327 
 appliances . See  energy effi ciency 
regulations 
 apps, weight-loss nudge , 100, 211–12, 
327 
 Apptimizer , 111 
 arbitrary norms, axiom violations and , 
43–45 
 Ariely, Dan , 97 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

332 
INDEX
 Arrow, Kenneth J. , 298 
 asymmetric information, energy 
effi ciency standards on , 254–55 
 ATM withdrawals, card return and , 
234–35 
 attitude-changing slippery slopes , 
59n25 
 Automatic (driving history feedback) , 
102–3 
 automatic payment nudges , 146–48 
 automation, in health application 
nudges , 99–100 
 automobiles . See  fuel effi ciency 
standards 
 autonomy . See  personal interests 
 auto-renewal nudges , 146 
 availability bias 
 calorie counts and , 145 
 characteristics of , 157n46 
 CREATE model and , 108 
 nutritional labeling and , 21–22 
 optimism bias vs. , 51 
 Ayres, Ian , 148 
 B 
 bad choices . See also  failing better 
 Dutch bookie argument and , 41 
 as learning mechanism , 6–7, 27, 
320–23 
 market incentives and , 162 
 Bank of America, Keep the Change 
program , 128–30 
 banks, ATM withdrawals, card return 
and , 234–35 
 Bar-Gill, Oren , 235 
 Baum, Charles L. , II, 199 
 Baum, Matthew , 305 
 Becker, Gary , 295 
 Beckett, Samuel , 67, 68 
 Beggs, Jody , 5, 323, 326 
 behavioral bias . See also  bias 
 evolving, ecologically rational 
landscape and , 228–33 
 incomplete understanding of , 165 
 New York City’s soda ban and , 175 
 behavioral change 
 Berkeley, Calif.’s soda tax and , 
176–77 
 private sector and technology for , 5 
 behavioral design, new paternalism 
and , 8–9, 11n21 
 behavioral economics and policy 
 behavioral science and choice , 
17–19 
 behavioral science in the private 
sector , 27–31 
 conclusion , 31, 317–28 
 evolutionary psychology and , 
292–94 
 healthcare nudges and , 291 
 nudge policy and , 20–22 
 overview , 15–16 
 problems with nudges , 22–27 
 prospect theory and , 294–96 
 behavioral failures 
 biased decisions as , 2, 39 
 as learning mechanism , 6–7, 27 
 behavioral fi nance , 20 . See also 
 consumer fi nance 
 Behavioral Insights Team, UK’s , 3, 9, 
97, 150–51, 244 
 behavioral interventions 
 markets and , 228 
 profi t-maximizing , 28–29 
 behavioral law and economics , 20 
 behavioral scientists, product design 
practitioners trained by , 97 
 beliefs, individual decision making 
and , 17–18 
 Benartzi, Shlomo , 131, 167 
 benefi cial nudges, defi nition of , 127 
 benefi t-cost analysis (BCA) , 
80–81, 319 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

INDEX 333
 Berkeley, Calif.’s soda tax , 176–77, 
178 
 Betterment , 101 
 bias . See also  specifi c types of bias 
 cognitive limitations of human mind 
and , 46 
 normative criteria for rational 
behavior and , 39, 57n3 
 biased decisions, as behavioral failures , 
2 
 biohacking , 308 
 Bleich, Sara N. , 207 
 Blockbuster , 227, 244 
 Bloomberg, Michael , 144, 174, 201, 
301 
 BMI Calculator , 327 
 books, private sector consumer 
product nudges and , 97 
 Bootcamp, Fogg’s , 97 
 Booz & Company , 76 
 bounded rationality , 18 
 brain capacity, as bandwidth , 2 
 Brain Juicer , 97 
 branding, market “failures” and , 228 
 Brock, Dan D. , 25 
 Burkeman, Oliver , 302 
 C 
 CAFE . See  fuel effi ciency standards 
 cafeteria arrangement of food 
 healthy eating and , 21, 103 
 as nudge example , 299, 301 
 personal interests and , 26 
 smaller plates and , 176 
 calculus programs, energy use 
reductions and , 271 
 calendars, online , 104 
 Cameron, David , 150 
 car occupants, effi cient vehicle size and 
risks for , 269–70, 284n97 
 car rental insurance nudges , 138–39 
 Carges, Jessica , 6 
 cars . See  fuel effi ciency standards 
 Carter, Jimmy , 319 
 case studies, overview , 5–7 
 Castro, Daniel , 77 
 Cawley, John , 210 
 cell phones . See also  Apple 
 machine algorithms as nudges on , 
326–27 
 Center for Financial Services 
Innovation (CFSI) , 102 
 changes to product, potential, 
performance improvement and , 
111–12 
 checklist, CREATE model as , 108 
 checks . See also  overdraft protection 
 overdraft fees for debit cards vs. , 
169 
 children, playground safety and 
learning by , 72–75 
 chlorofl uorocarbons (CFCs) , 164 
 choice . See also  choice architects; 
choice architecture 
 adaptive behavior and , 6, 27 
 behavioral science and , 17–19 
 biased or true preferences in , 4 
 freedom of , 59n24 
 individual interpretation of , 22–23 
 managing, commercial products for , 
30–31 
 in modern life , 1–2 
 too many, decision-making and , 
32–33n10, 130–31 
 choice architects 
 government planners as , 304–5 
 as human , 203–4 
 choice architecture 
 altering , 27, 225 
 defi nition of , 21 
 eating infl uences , 200–201 
 improving , 226 
 learning from , 65–66 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

334 
INDEX
 choice architecture (cont.) 
 markets and improvement of , 230 
 nudges , 138–39 
 Choose My Plate program , 198 
 Cialdini, Robert B. , 272–73 
 Clarifi  (money savings app) , 102 
 Clean Air Act , 264 
 Clean Power Plan , 275 
 Coca Cola , 164 
 Code of Ethics (AMA, 1847) , 297 
 cognition programs, energy use 
reductions and , 271 
 cognitive bias, preference reversal and , 
45 
 cognitive hazards (defi ciencies), 
learning from failing and , 69 
 cognitive load, simple to complex 
heuristics and , 47 
 collective goals, government nudges 
and , 29 
 commercial appliances, energy 
effi ciency standards for , 263–64 
 commitment and consistency principle, 
exercise and sleep tracking and , 
99 
 complete self-awareness, as rationality 
requirement , 41–42 
 compliance nudges , 136–38 
 confi rmation bias 
 credit scores and , 236 
 defi nition of , 19 
 Congress, federal government 
regulations and , 170, 171 
 constitutive norms 
 axiom violations and , 43 
 description of , 39–40 
 violation of completeness , 41–42 
 constrained preference-satisfaction , 17 
 constructive rationality, Smith on 
ecological rationality vs. , 231 
 consulting services, consumer 
technology design and , 97 
 consumer fi nance 
 bad market nudges and , 236–40 
 behavioral biases and , 228–33 
 ecological rationality and , 6 
 good market nudges and , 234–36 
 introduction , 225–28 
 market nudges and , 233–43 
 public vs. private nudges , 243–45 
 ugly market nudges and , 240–43 
 Consumer Finance Protection Bureau 
(CFPB) 
 behavioralists and , 234 
 consumer complaints database of , 236 
 credit card loyalty survey by , 230 
 credit card regulation , 243 
 on Marketing Services Agreements , 
239–40 
 overdraft protection regulation , 174 
 on payday lending , 242–43 
 consumer heterogeneity, government 
nudges and , 257–59, 320, 323 
 consumer technology 
 behavioral technique 
implementation challenges in , 
110–11 
 behavioral technology routes to , 
96–98 
 conclusion , 113–14 
 effi cacy of nudges in , 108–13 
 fi nance applications , 101–2 
 health applications , 98–101 
 nudge criteria and , 103–4 
 other behavioral nudge applications , 
102–3 
 overview of nudges by , 95–96 
 types of nudge interventions , 105–8 
 context changes, implementing 
behavioral techniques and , 
110–11, 117n35, 167 
 contract termination hurdles 
 gym memberships and , 140, 
157n38 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

INDEX 335
 cooperation, individual, self-focused 
nudges and , 30–31 
 Corporate Average Fuel Economy 
(CAFE) standards , 253–54 
 correctional behavior, self-motivated , 
29–31 
 costs, welfare or freedom , 38 
 unintended , 52–55 
 Council of Wage and Price Stability , 
267, 268 
 Cowen, Tyler , 327 
 CREATE model , 105–8 
 Credit CARD Act , 243 
 credit cards 
 automatic payments using , 146–47, 
151 
 legislation regulating , 243 
 loyalty to, CFPB survey of , 243 
 optimism bias and debit cards vs. , 
235 
 as private nudging , 228 
 credit life insurance , 236–37 
 credit scores , 236 
 cross-sectional studies, of preference 
reversal , 57–58n9 
 cues, in CREATE model , 105–6, 
116n28 
 D 
 Data Protection Directive, EU’s , 76 
 debit cards 
 market nudges and , 235 
 overdraft fees for checks vs. , 169 
 reward programs , 248n33 
 decision errors . See also  failing better 
 as learning mechanism , 320–23 
 decision making . See also  choice 
 reminders and , 103 
 default nudges , 138–39, 167, 228 
 deliberative decision-making, 
evaluation in , 107 
 Demsetz, Harold , 79 
 Department of Energy (DOE) . See also 
 energy use 
 on commercial appliances , 263–64 
 consumer heterogeneity and , 
257–59, 323 
 on consumer’s information 
processing capability , 256–57 
 distributional effects of consumer 
discount rates , 262–63 
 energy effi ciency standards , 252, 
253, 254–55 
 heterogeneous time preferences and , 
259–62 
 Department of Transportation (DOT) . 
See also  fuel effi ciency standards 
 behavioral arguments , 265–66 
 fuel effi ciency standards , 252, 264 
 on rebound effect , 268 
 descriptive social norms 
 energy use reductions and , 
272–73 
 medication adherence and , 137 
 utility provider nudges and , 135 
 Design with Intent (Lockton) , 97 
 details, consumer product, 
implementing behavioral 
techniques and , 110, 117n35, 
167 
 Diabetes Prevention Program, NIH , 
100 
 Dietary Guidelines for Americans , 
204, 205, 303–4 
 DietBet , 100, 110 
 dieting programs, mobile , 100–101, 
116n17–18, 211–12 
 Dietz, Thomas , 271, 285n104 
 digital design, reminders in , 103–4 
 digital marketing optimization , 114 . 
See also  marketing optimization 
 discount rate 
 discount factors and , 49–50, 59n19 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

336 
INDEX
 discount rate (cont.) 
 distributional effects of , 262–63, 
280n51 
 future consumption needs and , 
50–51 
 of future energy savings , 264 
 for hunter-gatherers , 293 
 installments and , 58n11 
 over short vs. long segments of 
time , 45, 259–62 
 preference reversal and , 43–44 
 present bias vs. time-consistent 
impatience and , 48–50, 58n18 
 discounting , 292 
 disruptive technologies , 76, 228 
 diving boards, high, precautionary 
regulations and , 73, 91n94 
 DNA analysis, 23andMe and , 307 
 Doctor on Demand , 307 
 Dodd-Frank fi nancial reform 
legislation , 248n33 
 Doorways to Dreams (money savings 
app) , 102 
 downsizing portion size, voluntary , 
144–45 
 drugs, 3D-printed , 308 
 DuPont, CFC ban and , 164 
 Durbin Amendment , 248n33 
 Dutch bookie argument , 40–41 
 Dworkin, Gerald , 16 
 dynamic benefi ts, risk and , 67 
 E 
 Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) 
program , 107 
 ecological rationality 
 adaptive behavior as , 6 
 market nudges and , 232–33 
 small- and large-world distinction 
in , 46, 58n14 
 Smith on constructive rationality vs. , 
231 
 economic man ( homo economicus ) , 
299–300 
 The Economist , 52 
 Edison, Thomas , 71 
 Egan, Dan , 101 
 electronic transponders, highway tolls 
and , 151 
 elicitation method, of discount rate , 
49, 50 
 Ellison, Brenna , 206 
 Eloqua , 111 
 employee wellness programs , 100 
 employers, weight-reduction programs 
and , 209–10 
 e-NABLE , 307, 309 
 endowment effect , 19, 225–26 
 energy effi ciency regulations 
 behavioral economics of , 252–53 
 behavioral technologies and , 
270–73, 285n104 
 for commercial appliances , 263–64 
 conclusion , 275–76 
 consumer benefi ts , 6, 255–57 
 consumer heterogeneity and , 
257–59 
 introduction , 251–52 
 less-effi cient appliances and , 166 
 present bias and , 165 
 rebound effect and appliance 
effi ciency , 267–68 
 for residential appliances , 254–63 
 standards on , 8 
 utility provider nudges and , 134–36 
 Energy Effi ciency Resource Standards 
(EERS) , 274 
 Energy Independence and Security Act 
of 2007 (EISA) , 253–54, 264 
 energy paradox (energy effi ciency 
gap) , 165–66 
 Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 
1975 (EPCA) , 253, 255, 264 
 energy use . See  energy effi ciency 
regulations 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

INDEX 337
 engineering, design failures before 
progress in , 71–72 
 entrepreneurship, in Europe vs. US , 
75–78 
 Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) 
 behavioral technologies and , 
274–75 
 fuel effi ciency standards , 252, 
264–65 
 on rebound effect , 268 
 on safety and fuel effi ciency , 269 
 environmental regulation . See  energy 
effi ciency regulations; fuel 
effi ciency standards 
 epistemic problem with nudges , 22, 26 
 Epstein, Ronald M. , 297 
 error, as information source , 70–71 
 ethics 
 consumer behavior regulation and , 4 
 of nudges , 22, 24–25 
 private sector, consumer behavior 
and , 5 
 truthful disclosures and , 55 
 ethnicity, obesity and , 308 
 European Union (EU), data-driven 
digital economy and , 75–78 
 evaluation, in CREATE model , 107 
 Evil by Design (Nodder) , 97 
 evolutionary biology, healthcare 
nudges and , 291 
 evolutionary psychology , 292–94 
 Executive Order 12044, on benefi t- 
cost analysis , 319 
 Executive Order 12866 
 energy effi ciency standards , 254 
 government intervention and , 
317–18 
 exercise equivalents, menu labeling 
and , 202–3 
 expected utility maximization 
 as individual decision-making 
model , 17–18 
 medication adherence nudges and , 
137 
 experience 
 in CREATE model , 108 
 learning from. See  failing better 
 experimental choices, real world 
choices vs. , 203 
 experimentation 
 on consumer product changes , 112 
 in golf , 321–22 
 learning from , 65–66 
 Express Scripts , 180–81, 182 
 externalities, energy effi ciency 
standards on , 254, 255 
 F 
 Facebook, nudges on , 102, 104, 113, 
301 
 facts about obesity , 198 
 failing better 
 benefi ts of learning during , 67–69 
 conclusion , 81–82 
 engineering progress and , 71–72 
 epistemic ignorance and , 78–79 
 EU, entrepreneurialism and , 75–78 
 introduction , 65–66 
 playground safety and , 72–75 
 precaution dictating policy and , 
69–71 
 precautionary regulation usefulness 
and , 79–81 
 risk potential and , 66–67 
 Farley, Kate , 270–72, 274 
 FCB (advertising agency) , 97 
 federal government nudges , 170–74 
 Federal Reserve Board (FRB) 
 credit card regulation , 243 
 on credit life insurance , 237 
 mortgages, fi nancial crisis and , 
241–42 
 overdraft protection regulation , 
168–70, 174, 237, 238–39 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

338 
INDEX
 Federal Trade Commission (FTC) , 
214–15 
 feedback 
 goal setting and , 115–16n15 
 for government nudges , 213 
 for markets vs. government agencies , 
244–45, 325 
 wearable products , 100 
 FICO , 182 
 fi nancial decision-making . See also 
 consumer fi nance 
 case study , 6 
 consumer technology nudges and , 
101–2, 116n19, 181–82 
 Thaler on , 20 
 Finkelstein, Amy , 151 
 Finkelstein, Eric A. , 199, 308 
 FitBit , 98, 99, 110, 149, 307 
 Fogg, BJ , 97, 100–101 
 food and beverage industry, health 
food promotion by , 208, 222n72 
 Food and Brand Lab , 103 
 Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
 biohacking and , 308 
 drug approval process , 289–90 
 information technology and , 309 
 on smokeless tobacco products , 55 
 on 3D-printed drugs , 308 
 on 23andMe and genetic data , 307 
 on Vending Machine rule , 172 
 Food Guide Pyramid, USDA’s , 204–5 
 Ford, William F. , 199 
 Fouquet, Roger , 268 
 401(k) plans , 21, 25, 130–31 . See also 
 retirement savings; savings 
 framing 
 decision making and , 19 
 irrelevant alternatives and , 42 
 outcomes of discount factors 
measurements and , 49 
 personal interests and , 26 
 Frederick, Shane , 261 
 free, as incentive , 107 
 free shipping nudges , 125–26, 138 
 Freeman, Andrea , 305 
 friction removal, to increase ability to 
act , 108 
 Friedman, Milton , 292, 299 
 Friedman, Rose , 299 
 fuel effi ciency standards 
 behavioral arguments , 265–66 
 behavioral consequences , 267–69 
 behavioral economics vs. policy on , 
318 
 case study , 6 
 conclusion , 275–76 
 consumer preferences and , 266–67 
 EPA and DOT on , 252 
 mandate on , 165 
 overview , 264–65 
 rebound effect and , 268 
 furnaces, effi ciency rules for , 258–59, 
278n34 
 future consumption needs, 
overestimating, discount rate and , 
50–51 
 G 
 gamifi cation techniques , 100 
 gas price predictions, consumers on 
fuel effi ciency standards and , 
266–67 
 Gayer, Ted , 258 
 generalizability, uncertain, 
implementing behavioral 
techniques and , 111 
 GE's cash incentives, smoking 
cessation and , 107 
 Gigerenzer, Gerd , 46 
 Gill, Tim , 75 
 Gine, Xavier , 110 
 Ginsberg, Douglas , 79 
 Glaeser, Edward , 29 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

INDEX 339
 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor , 
75–76 
 Glowcaps, Vitality’s , 100, 116n16, 
161, 182 
 goal setting, digital nudges for , 102, 
115–16n15 
 God Complex, Harford on , 79 
 Goldberg, Jordan , 148 
 Goldberg, Julie , 296 
 Goldberg, Rube , 305 
 golf, experimentation in , 321–22 
 Gordon, Richard , 296 
 government nudges . See also 
 paternalism; regulations; 
regulatory nudges;  specifi c agencies 
or departments 
 collective goals and , 29 
 consumer heterogeneity and , 320, 
323 
 consumer-welfare-enhancing , 148–50 
 failure of , 182–83 
 federal , 170–74 
 market nudges vs. , 212–14, 243–45, 
320, 325–28 
 mortgages , 240–42 
 role of , 150–51, 152–53 
 state and local , 174–79 
 Sunstein on , 159–60 
 technologies and , 274–75 
 testing effi cacy of , 325 
 weight-loss theory criticisms and , 
201–5 
 Graboyes, Robert , 6, 294–95, 306, 
327 
 “The Greatest Game Ever Played,” 
322 
 The Greatest Good Group , 97 
 Greene, David L. , 268 
 greenhouse gas emissions, as 
externalities , 254 
 GreenRoad (driving history feedback) , 
102–3 
 Greenspan, Alan , 292 
 Greenstone, Michael , 165–66 
 groceries, arrangement of food in , 301 
 gym memberships , 139–40, 326 
 H 
 hands, prosthetic, 3D-printed , 307 
 Hanson, Robin , 293–94 
 hard paternalism , 7–8, 228, 304–9 
 Harford, Tim , 79 
 harm principle, Mill on , 16 
 Harris, Lee , 304–5, 310, 327–28 
 Hausman, Jerry A. , 262 
 Hayek, Friedrich von , 26, 67–68, 231, 
306 
 Hazen, Gordon , 296 
 Health and Human Services, 
Department of, Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans and , 
204 
 health- and nutrition-related (HNR) 
claims, of new food products , 
208–9, 223n74 
 health application nudges , 98–101 
 healthcare nudges 
 conclusion , 309–10 
 effi cacy of , 303–4 
 introduction , 289–91 
 nudge theory , 299–301 
 as political , 304–9 
 science, ethics, and politics on , 6, 
291–99 
 as voluntary or coerced , 301–3 
 healthy eating . See also  cafeteria 
arrangement of food; nutritional 
labeling; sodas 
 dietary fi ber education , 232 
 Healthy Weight Commitment 
Foundation (HWCF) , 222n72 
 Healy, Ann Marie , 69 
 HelloWallet , 102, 109, 111 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

340 
INDEX
 Henderson, David R. , 266–67 
 Henderson, Lawrence , 298 
 heuristics 
 decision making , 42 
 intuitive , 105 
 optimizing strategies vs. , 47–48 
 as shortcuts , 46 
 high diving boards, precautionary 
regulations and , 73, 91n94 
 highway tolls, automated , 151 
 Hippocrates , 296 
 Homer , 104 
 honesty nudges , 142–43 
 Horwitz, Steven , 69 
 Huckabee, Mike , 207 
 hunter-gatherers 
 aid for injury among , 294 
 choices for , 1 
 discount rate for , 293 
 Hyman, David , 305 
 hyperbolic discounting , 19 
 hypothetical bias , 166 
 I 
 I, Pencil (Read) , 231 
 ideals, sacrifi cing personal interests for , 
23 
 ideas42 , 97 
 impatience . See  time-consistent 
impatience 
 implementation intentions, self-effi cacy 
and , 107 
 incandescent light bulbs , 257 
 incentive-altering slippery slopes , 
59n25 
 income . See also  money 
 discount rate and future fl ows of , 
43–44 
 indifference, preference ordering and , 
57n4 
 infomercials , 125–26, 138 
 information, complete, rational choice 
and , 54–55 
 information processing capability 
 consumer preferences vs. , 256 
 energy effi ciency regulations and , 
255 
 fuel effi ciency standards and , 266 
 information retrieval , 236 
 information technology (IT) 
revolution , 308 
 injunctive social norms , 272–73 
 inner neoclassical agent, new 
paternalism and , 48, 58n16 
 innovation 
 in Europe vs. US , 75–78 
 models of , 162–65 
 precautionary principle and , 70 
 short-term failure and , 68 
 Innovations for Poverty Action , 102 
 installment payments, discount rate 
and , 45, 58n11 
 insurance 
 car rental , 138–39 
 credit life , 236–37 
 interactive model of innovation , 
163–64, 178 
 Internet 
 disruptive technologies and , 76 
 review sites , 326 
 intuitive heuristics , 105 
 investments, management nudges , 101 
 Ippolito, Pauline , 232 
 irrational exuberance, Greenspan on , 
292 
 Irrational Labs , 97 
 irrelevant alternatives, rationality and 
independence of , 42, 57n6 
 J 
 Jacobsen, Mark R. , 269 
 Jarlenski, Marian P. , 207 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

INDEX 341
 Jawbone 
 behavioral nudges and , 96–97, 179 
 behavioral research methods and , 
98–99 
 Jenny Craig , 211 
 Johnson, Steven , 306 
 Just, David , 176 
 K 
 Kahneman, Daniel 
 awards for , 311n18 
 behavioral economists and , 20 
 on heuristics and biases , 18–19, 46 
 on prospect theory , 294 
 on rational actors , 295 
 Karlan, Dean , 104, 148–49 
 Keas (employee wellness program 
company) , 100, 110 
 Keep the Change program, Bank of 
America’s , 128–30 
 Kelvin, Lord , 289 
 Kirkegaard, Jacob , 76 
 Klick, Jonathan , 27, 69 
 Kwong, Kelvin , 96–97 
 L 
 labeling . See  nutritional labeling 
 lawmakers, as risk averse, failing freely 
and , 69–71 
 lawsuits, playground safety and , 73 
 learning, from bad choices , 6–7, 27, 
41, 320–23 . See also  failing better 
 legal issues, truthful disclosures and , 
55 
 Levine, David K. , 165 
 Lewis, H.L. , 68 
 liberal neutrality, personal interests 
and , 24–25 
 libertarian paternalism , 7–8, 21, 
300–301 
 linear model of innovation , 163, 164, 
178 
 Lockton, Dan , 97 
 Loewenstein, George , 52 
 longitudinal studies, of preference 
reversal , 58n9 
 long-term impact of nudge policy , 4–5 
 Lose It (machine algorithm) , 327 
 loss aversion , 19, 115n13, 132 
 loyalty, health care as signal for , 294 
 Lusk, Jayson , 206 
 M 
 Machlup, Fritz , 58n12 
 magnitude effects, time delays as 
constant, discount rate and , 50 
 “man on the spot,” Hayek on , 231–32 
 Manhattan (fi lm) , 146 
 Mannix, Brian , 6, 323 
 market corrections of fraudulent 
practices, government and , 214–15 
 market failures, Executive Order 
12866 on government 
intervention and , 254 
 market incentives, Abdukadirov on , 
161–62 
 market nudges 
 Abdukadirov’s defi nition of , 161 
 as bad , 236–40 
 behavioral biases and , 3, 228–33 
 competition and , 181–82 
 customization of , 179–81 
 as good , 234–36 
 government nudges vs. , 212–14, 
243–45, 320, 325–28 
 improved consumer choice 
architecture and , 233 
 introduction , 225–28 
 overview , 178–79, 233–34 
 as ugly , 240–43 
 weight-loss , 181–82 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

342 
INDEX
 market penetration for effi cient 
products, increased effi ciency and 
delays in , 269 
 Marketdata Enterprises , 207–8 
 marketing optimization 
 assessing impact of consumer 
products and , 111–12 
 presumption of impact of consumer 
product and , 112–13, 117n36 
 Marketing Services Agreements 
(MSAs) , 239–40 
 Marlow, Michael , 6, 323, 324, 325 
 Martinez, Steve W. , 208 
 Mathios, Alan , 232 
 Mazur-Stommen, Susan , 270–72, 274 
 McQuinn, Alan , 77 
 mechanical engineering, design failures 
before success in , 71–72 
 Medicaid, Affordable Care Act and , 
305 
 medical paternalism 
 defi nition of , 6 
 healthcare nudges and , 291, 296–98 
 medical tourism , 307 
 medication adherence nudges , 100, 
136–38, 180–81, 182 
 memory, short term, limits on , 105 
 mental accounting 
 contract termination hurdles and , 
157n38 
 Keep the Change programs and , 129 
 Mental Notes (Anderson) , 97 
 Merrill Lynch , 108 
 Metcalfe’s Law , 309 
 Mexico’s soda tax , 177–78 
 Microsoft, Bing site nudge testing by , 
115n4 
 Mill, John Stuart , 16, 24, 28, 323 
 Miller, Sofi e E. , 6, 256, 262, 323 
 Mindless Eating (Wansink) , 101 
 Minnesota’s New Generation Energy 
Act (2007) , 274 
 Mint.com , 102, 181–82 
 Mitchell, Gregory , 27, 69 
 Moffett, Matt , 75 
 money . See also  savings 
 assumptions about , 57n8 
 discount rate for other options 
vs. , 50 
 management nudges , 101–2, 
116n19 
 Moore’s Law , 309 
 moral codes, sacrifi cing personal 
interests for , 23 
 Morningstar, investment management 
nudges and , 101 
 mortgages 
 as private nudging , 228 
 30-year fi xed-rate , 240–42, 
249n49 
 Moser, Petra , 76–77 
 Motivate (fi tness app) , 100 
 Motivation-Ability-Trigger model, 
Fogg's , 100–101 
 Motorola smart watches , 98 
 Moves (fi tness app) , 100 
 Mullainathan, Sendhil , 2, 179–80 
 multiple regression analysis , 47 
 myopic individuals, subgoals 
vs. superordinate goals of , 
54, 60n26 
 MyPlate, USDA’s , 205 
 myths about obesity , 197 
 N 
 narrative bias , 117n36 
 narrow choice bracketing , 129, 
154n10 
 National Bureau of Economic 
Research (NBER) , 260 
 National Highway Transportation 
Safety Administration 
(NHTSA) , 269 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

INDEX 343
 National Institutes of Health, Diabetes 
Prevention Program , 100 
 National Research Council , 269 
 naturalistic fallacy , 56n1 
 Nature , 308 
 Nest Thermostat , 273 
 Netfl ix , 141–42, 227, 244 
 New England Journal of Medicine , 197 
 new paternalism 
 behavioral design and , 8–9, 11n21 
 conclusions , 55–56 
 knowledge demands of , 48–52 
 normative criteria and , 39–45 
 overview , 37–38 
 real-world behavior , 45–48 
 unintended costs of , 52–55 
 use of term , 7 
 New York City 
 Administrative Procedure Act , 174 
 large-sized soda ban in , 8, 144, 
175–76, 202, 291, 301 
 The New York Times , 55 
 New York University’s Stern School of 
Business , 264 
 Newell, Richard , 260, 261 
 NFIB v Sebelius , 305 
 Nike exercise band , 98 
 No Fear (Gill) , 75 
 noncore utilization, gym memberships 
and , 140 
 Noom (mobile dieting app) , 101 
 normative criteria for rational behavior 
 as constitutive or prescriptive , 39–40 
 Dutch bookie argument , 40–41 
 naturalistic fallacy and , 56n1 
 shocks and biases and , 39 
 Nudge (Thaler and Sunstein) 
 on food placement as nudge , 299 
 on less onerous nudges , 318 
 on nudges vs. paternalism , 20–21 
 opening research to mainstream by , 
96, 97 
 Wansink’s mindless eating research 
and , 200 
 on wiser decisions enhancing 
welfare , 196 
 nudge design 
 market incentives , 161–62 
 market nudges , 161 
 models of innovation , 162–65 
 regulatory nudges , 160–61 
 uncertainty in , 165–70 
 Nudge Unit . See  Behavioral Insights 
Team, UK’s 
 nudges . See also  specifi c types of nudges 
 healthcare , 289, 290 
 measuring success of , 50, 59n21 
 Thaler and Sunstein defi nition of , 
21 
 theory on , 299–301 
 use of term , 7–8 
 Nutrisystem , 211 
 Nutrition Labeling and Education Act 
(1990) , 303–4 
 nutrition nudges . See also  healthy 
eating; sodas; weight-loss 
nudges 
 healthy options in unhealthy meals , 
202 
 market heterogeneity and , 144–45 
 nutritional labeling 
 Affordable Care Act on , 305 
 availability bias and , 21–22 
 obesity epidemic and , 303–4 
 on trans fats , 223n74 
 Vending Machine rule and , 
172–74 
 weight-loss nudges and , 202–3, 
220n42 
 O 
 Obama, Barack , 3 
 Obamacare . See  Affordable Care Act 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

344 
INDEX
 obesity epidemic . See also  sodas; 
weight-loss nudges 
 case study , 6, 195–224 
 causes and prevention , 196–98 
 childhood, creative exploration on 
playgrounds and , 74–75 
 ethnicity and , 308 
 fat tax and , 54, 60n26 
 government nudges and , 201–5, 
319, 324 
 leveling off of , 216n1 
 nutritional labeling and , 303–4 
 Odysseus , 104, 294 
 Offi ce of Management and Budget 
(OMB) 
 Circular A-94, on discount rates for 
public regulation benefi ts , 260 
 Unifi ed Agenda , 254 
 Ogilvy Change , 97 
 Ohlhausen, Maureen K. , 78 
 OKCupid, nudges on , 113 
 Omada Health , 100, 110 
 1/n rule , 47 
 online streaming nudges , 133–34, 
155n21 
 Opower 
 Home Energy Report , 103, 179, 
181, 272–73 
 nudges in , 96–97 
 testing effi cacy of products of , 109 
 utilities working with , 274 
 optimism bias , 19, 51, 235 
 Optimizely , 111 
 opting-out 
 401(k) plans , 25 
 opting-in vs. , 130–31, 160 
 overdraft protection , 238 
 others, sacrifi cing personal interests 
for , 23 
 overchoice , 32–33n10, 130–31 
 overdraft protection 
 default rules on , 237–38 
 Federal Reserve regulation of , 
168–70, 174, 237 
 government vs. consumer 
preferences on , 238–39 
 Keep the Change programs and , 
129 
 payday lending regulation and , 242 
 as private nudging , 228 
 refunds of assessed fees for , 249n43 
 ozone layer depletion, CFCs and , 164 
 P 
 Paradox of Choice , 130–31 
 Pareto nudges 
 defi nition of , 127, 154n4 
 government , 151–52 
 markets failure to provide , 147–48 
 savings , 127–32 
 voluntary downsizing and , 144–45 
 paternalism . See also  specifi c types of 
paternalism 
 defi nition of individual vs. state , 16 
 liberal neutrality and , 25 
 use of term , 7–8 
 PatientsLikeMe , 307 
 pattern recognition systems, 
automatic , 105 
 payday lending , 242 
 peanuts principle , 129 
 Pearson, Peter J.G. , 268 
 Pebble smart watches , 98 
 perception 
 of health risks, availability bias and , 
51 
 of time, discount rate and , 44–45, 
58n10 
 permissionless innovation, in US vs. 
Europe , 76 
 personal interests 
 complexity of, nudges and , 22–24 
 nudges and , 25–26 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

INDEX 345
 persuasion, private vs. public use of , 29 
 Petroski, Henry , 68, 72, 81 
 Pinker, Steven , 292–93 
 PlanSuccess, Allianz Global Investors , 
149 
 plate size, weight loss and , 202 
 playground safety , 72–75 
 policy . See also  behavioral economics 
and policy 
 behavioral biases and , 2–3 
 conditions necessary for developing , 
4 
 failing freely and , 69–71 
 knowledge demands of , 48–52 
 Nirvana approach to , 79, 91n94 
 paternalistic, regulatory remedies as , 
3 
 welfare or freedom costs and , 38 
 policymakers . See also  government 
nudges 
 crafting welfare-enhancing policy , 
38, 48–52 
 political capital, nudges and , 153 
 Portion Cap rule, New York City’s , 
175–76 
 Posner, Richard , 26 
 practical problems with nudges , 22, 
26–27 
 precautionary principle , 70, 72, 
78–79 
 predatory nudges , 326 
 Predictably Irrational (Ariely) , 96, 97 
 preference ordering 
 indifference and , 57n4 
 savings and , 58n17 
 Strong Axiom of Revealed 
Preference and , 57n6 
 preference reversal 
 axiom of stationarity and , 43–44 
 experimental evidence on , 57–58n9 
 Prelec, Drazen , 146 
 prescriptive norms 
 description of , 40 
 rationality of preference norms and , 
42 
 shocks and biases and , 39 
 present bias 
 consumer choices and , 165–66 
 discount rate now or in future and , 
48, 58n18 
 distinguishing between time- 
consistent impatience and , 
48–50, 58n18 
 heuristics or rules for decisions and , 
57n5 
 measuring , 59n20 
 of policymakers , 53 
 preference reversal and , 44 
 presumptions about obesity , 197–98 
 Prevent (diabetes prevention 
program) , 110 
 Price, J.A. , 210 
 private benefi ts, energy effi ciency 
standards and , 256 
 private fi rms, defi nition of , 154n3 
 private sector . See also  market nudges 
 behavioral technologies used by , 5 
 discussion , 151–53 
 energy use information and tools 
and , 252–53 
 epistemic challenges for public 
sector vs. , 5 
 government’s role in nudging , 
150–51 
 individual, self-focused nudges , 29–31 
 nudges and market heterogeneity , 
143–48 
 nudging overview , 125–26 
 opportunities for other market 
nudges , 148–50 
 Pareto nudges , 127–38 
 profi t-maximizing behavioral 
interventions , 28–29 
 rent-seeking nudges , 138–43 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

346 
INDEX
 procrastination 
 hyperbolic discounting and , 19 
 social scaffolding and , 30 
 techniques to overcome , 108, 
116n29 
 product bans, energy use reductions 
and , 270 
 product design, behavioral nudges 
and , 96–97 
 profi t-maximizing behavioral 
interventions , 28–29 
 progressivism , 6, 291, 298–99 
 prospect theory 
 behavioral economics and , 294–96 
 medical paternalism and , 296–98 
 medication adherence nudges and , 
137 
 progressivism and , 298–99 
 prosthetic hands, 3D-printed , 307 
 Proteus Digital Health , 182 
 psychological shocks 
 normative criteria for rational 
behavior and , 39 
 psychology 
 decision making and , 16 
 imperfections in, rational choice 
and , 15 
 public goods, private sector nudges as , 
152 
 public sector . See also  government 
nudges 
 behavioral failures and , 6–7 
 epistemic challenges for private 
sector vs. , 5 
 Pugsley, Alfred , 67 
 Pure Food and Drug Act (1906) , 298 
 Q 
 Quaker Oats , 232 
 Quick Enrollment, for 401(k) 
enrollment , 131 
 R 
 Rachlinski, Jeffrey J. , 27, 69 
 randomized control trials , 109, 110, 
111, 117n34 
 rating websites , 236 
 rational consumers, Pinker on , 293 
 rationality 
 behavioral economics challenge to , 
228 
 complete information and , 54–55 
 complete self-awareness and , 41–42, 
57n4 
 constitutive norms of , 40 
 Friedman on , 292 
 normatively persuasive criteria for , 
38, 39–45 
 perfect vs. reasonable , 2–3 
 psychological imperfections and , 15 
 Simon on , 46–47 
 understanding market process and , 
319 
 violation of independence of 
irrelevant alternatives , 42, 
57nn6–7 
 violation of transitivity , 42–43 
 rationality axioms 
 biases as violation of , 57n3 
 real-world behavior and , 45–48, 
58nn12–13 
 reasonable behavior and , 41 
 utility function and , 40 
 reactions, in CREATE model , 106–7 
 Read, Daniel , 45 
 Read, Leonard , 231 
 real estate lenders, Marketing Services 
Agreements and , 239–40 
 real-world behavior 
 normatively persuasive criteria vs. , 38 
 rationality axioms and , 45–48 
 rebound effect , 267–68 
 redesign and testing, interactive model 
of innovation and , 163–64 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

INDEX 347
 regulations . See also  government 
nudges 
 behavioral biases and , 3 
 information data for design of , 4 
 sunsetting guidelines for , 81 
 regulators, as risk averse, failing freely 
and , 69–71 
 Regulatory Analysis Review Group 
(RARG) , 267–68 
 Regulatory Flexibility Act , 173 
 regulatory impact analysis, precautionary 
regulations and , 80–81 
 regulatory nudges . See also 
 government nudges 
 Abdukadirov’s defi nition of , 160–61 
 failure of , 182–83 
 reminders 
 external, nudge defi nition and , 103 
 nudges vs. , 104 
 rental subscription nudges , 141–42 
 rent-seeking nudges 
 defi nition of , 127, 154n5 
 government , 151–52 
 private sector , 138–43, 151–52 
 repeat dealing, market “failures” and , 
228 
 residential appliance purchases 
 consumer heterogeneity and , 
257–59 
 distributional effects of , 262–63 
 energy effi ciency regulations 
overview , 254–55 
 energy effi ciency regulatory benefi ts , 
255–56 
 heterogeneous time preferences for , 
259–62 
 Residential Transportation Energy 
Consumption Surveys , 268 
 Resilience :  Why Things Bounce Back 
(Zolli and Healy) , 69 
 retirement savings , 21, 25, 108, 
116n29, 130–31 . See also  savings 
 rewards, social scaffolding and , 30–31 
 risk 
 entrepreneurship in EU vs. US and , 
75–78 
 potential benefi ts of , 66–67 
 Rizzo, Mario , 4, 26, 56, 319, 320 
 Rod of Aesculapius , 297 
 Roosevelt, Theodore , 298, 299 
 Rosen, Deena , 96–97 
 Rosetta Stone , 104 
 Rothman, Salovey et al , 295 
 rulemaking . See also  government 
nudges; heuristics; regulations; 
regulatory nudges 
 precautionary principle and , 70 
 RunKeeper (fi tness app) , 100 
 Rush, Benjamin , 296 
 RxAnte , 182 
 S 
 safety, fuel economy standards and , 
269–70, 284n97 
 salience 
 nudges , 146–48 
 online streaming nudges and , 
134 
 Sandseter, Ellen , 74 
 satisfi cing 
 optimal or scarce decision resources 
and , 33n11 
 Simon on , 18 
 Savage, Leonard , 45–46, 58n13 
 Save More Tomorrow program , 
131–32, 155n20, 167 
 SaveUp app , 102 
 savings . See also  retirement savings 
 knowledge demands of policy on , 
48–50, 58n17 
 nudges and market heterogeneity , 
143–44 
 private sector nudges for , 127–32 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

348 
INDEX
 scalability, market nudge design and , 
179–80 
 scale effect, of paternalism , 54, 
60n27 
 Schelling, Thomas , 293 
 Schiphol International Airport urinals, 
nudge on , 103 
 Schmidt, Eric , 308 
 Schumpeter, Joseph , 68 
 Schwartz, Alan , 296 
 science, on healthcare nudges , 291 
 ScreenRX , 181 
 Searle, John , 39 
 Seductive Interaction Design 
(Anderson) , 97 
 seeming violations, actual violations 
vs. , 57n7 
 Self Determination Theory, Ryan and 
Deci's , 101 
 self-control, cognitive capacity and , 2 
 Sensa Products LLC , 214 
 Shafi r, Eldar , 2 
 sharing economy, in Europe vs. US , 77 
 shrouded fees , 236, 243, 326 
 Siegler, M. R. , 296 
 Siikamäki, Juha , 260, 261 
 Simester, Duncan , 146 
 Simon, Herbert , 18, 46–47 
 sin taxes 
 optional, measured discount rate 
variations and , 50, 52 
 threat of expansion of , 53–54 
 sledding, precautionary regulations 
and , 73 
 Slim by Design (Wansink) , 97, 101 
 SlimByDesign.org , 116n18 
 slippery slopes , 59n25, 214, 229, 324 
 Small Business Regulatory 
Enforcement Fairness Act , 173 
 smart watches , 98 
 smartphones , 100, 327 . See also  Apple 
 Smith, Adam , 6, 319, 324 
 Smith, Vernon , 20, 231, 232 
 smokeless tobacco (snus), required 
warning on , 55 
 smoking, commercials on health 
effects of , 51 
 Sobal, Jeffery , 200 
 Social and Behavioral Sciences Team, 
Obama’s , 3 
 social norms 
 descriptive , 135, 137 
 home energy conservation and , 271 
 Opower’s Home Energy Report 
and , 272–73 
 social scaffolding, willpower and , 30 
 Social Security Administration , 
319–20 
 Socialist Party , 299 
 sodas 
 ban vs. nudge on , 302 
 Berkeley, Calif.’s tax on , 176–77, 178 
 Mexico’s tax on , 177–78 
 New York City ban on , 8, 144, 
175–76, 201, 291, 301 
 soft paternalism , 7–8, 69, 228 . See also 
 nudges 
 Split tests , 111 
 Startuponomics , 97 
 startups, Europe’s suppression of , 
75–76 
 state and local government nudges , 
174–79 
 static benefi ts, risk and , 67 
 stationarity, axiom of , 43–44 
 status-quo bias , 130, 134 
 stealth health tactic , 207 
 Stewart, James B. , 77 
 Stickk.com , 102, 104, 109–10, 
148–49, 211 
 sticky information or knowledge , 
166–67, 168 
 streaming music , 155n22 . See also 
 online streaming nudges 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

INDEX 349
 streaming services nudges , 133–34 
 Strombotne, Kiersten L. , 199 
 Strong Axiom of Revealed Preference , 
57n6 
 structural engineering, design failures 
before success in , 71–72 
 substitution effect , 60n27 
 sugar taxes , 8 
 Sunk-Cost Fallacy , 139 
 Sunstein, Cass 
 on consumer long-term interests , 
126 
 on defaults , 11n21 
 on government nudges , 159–60, 
196 
 on government vs. market nudges , 
205–6 
 on imperfect or ineffective nudges , 
212 
 on incomplete information , 55 
 on ineffective nudges , 153 
 on liberal paternalism , 300–301 
 on market incentives , 161–62 
 on nudges , 7–8, 299 
 on opt-out choices , 25, 160 
 on Schiphol International Airport 
urinals , 103 
 on soft interventions , 52, 59n24 
 on weight-loss nudges , 203 
 Surowiecki, James , 306 
 Swedish Match AB , 55 
 switched digital video (SDV) , 155n21 
 T 
 Tabarrok, Alex , 290 
 take-the-best (TTB) heuristic , 47 
 Taleb, Nassim Nicholas , 70–71, 78 
 tax refunds, nudge increasing savings 
rate and , 167–68 
 taxes . See also  sin taxes 
 behavior change policies as , 176–78 
 government nudges on , 150–51 
 hard paternalism of , 52–53 
 hidden, as predatory nudges , 326 
 technology . See also  disruptive 
technologies 
 behavioral biases and , 3 
 energy use reductions and , 252, 
270–73, 285n104 
 government nudges and , 274–75 
 private sector use of , 5 
 Teicholz, Nina , 204 
 telemedicine , 307 
 Tenner, Edward , 71–72 
 terminology , 7 
 testing market nudges , 109, 110, 111, 
112, 325 
 Thaler, Richard 
 on bans as not nudges , 302 
 as CFPB adviser , 234 
 on consumer long-term interests , 
126 
 on defaults , 11n21 
 on economic behavior anomalies , 20 
 on government nudges , 196 
 on government vs. market nudges , 
205–6 
 on imperfect or ineffective nudges , 
212 
 on incomplete information , 55 
 on ineffective nudges , 153 
 on liberal paternalism , 300–301 
 on nudges , 7–8, 299 
 on opt-out choices , 25, 160 
 Save More Tomorrow program and , 
131–32, 167 
 on Schiphol International Airport 
urinals , 103 
 on soft interventions , 52, 59n24 
 on weight-loss nudges , 203 
 thalidomide , 290 
 thermostats, Nest , 273 
 Thierer, Adam , 4–5, 322 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

350 
INDEX
 Thinking Fast and Slow (Kahneman) , 
96, 97 
 third-party certifi cation services , 230 
 Thomas, Lewis , 298 
 Thomas Aquinas, Saint , 66 
 3D-printed drugs , 308 
 3D-printed prosthetic hands , 307 
 Tierney, John , 73, 74 
 time, perception of, discount rate and , 
44–45, 58n10 
 Time Machine (Wells) , 321 
 time-consistent impatience 
 discount rate now or in future and , 
48–49, 58n10 
 distinguishing between present bias 
and , 49–50, 59n20 
 Save More Tomorrow program and , 
131–32 
 timing, in CREATE model , 108 
 To Engineer Is Human (Petroski) , 72 
 Topol, Eric , 296 
 traditional paternalism , 7 
 transitivity of preferences, transitivity 
of logical implication vs. , 42–43 
 trial without error, precautionary 
principle and , 70 
 true preferences 
 bias or , 4 
 new paternalism and , 48, 51–52, 56 
 Tversky, Amos , 18–19, 20, 46 
 23andMe , 307, 309 
 U 
 Ubel, Peter , 52 
 Uber , 77, 146–47 
 uBox pill reminder, Abiogenix’s , 100 
 “Uncertainty and the Welfare 
Economics of Health Care” 
(Arrow) , 298 
 Unifi ed Agenda, for energy effi ciency 
standards , 254 
 unintended consequences, nudge 
policies and , 52–55, 320, 323–24 
 United Kingdom 
 Behavioral Insights Team of , 3, 
150–51 
 John Innis Centre’s tomato , 327 
 tax debt collection in , 9 
 on 23andMe and genetic data , 307 
 US Consumer Product Safety 
Commission , 73 
 US Household Finance Initiative , 102 
 usage nudges , 132–36, 139–42, 
155n20 
 user interfaces, implementing 
behavioral techniques and , 110 
 utility function 
 heuristics or rules for decisions and , 
42 
 rationality axioms and , 40 
 of satisfi ed choice preferences , 17, 32n8 
 utility provider nudges , 134–36 
 utility theory, evolutionary psychology 
and , 292 
 V 
 Vending Machine rule , 171–74 
 Virgin Health , 100 
 Viscusi, Kip , 258 
 Vitality’s Glowcaps , 100, 116n16, 
161, 182 
 voluntary nudges , 301–3 
 von Hippel, Eric , 166 
 W 
 Wall Street Journal , 210, 297 
 Wansink, Brian 
 checklists for weight loss by , 101 
 as consultant , 97 
 food arrangement in cafeterias and , 
103 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com


---

INDEX 351
 on food sellers , 207 
 on mindless eating , 200, 219n32 
 on New York’s soda ban and , 176 
 on weight-loss nudges , 203 
 Washington Post , 274 
 wearable products . See also  FitBit; 
Jawbone 
 exercise bands , 99, 115n14 
 feedback , 100 
 weight-loss nudges and , 211–12 
 WebMD , 307 
 Weight Watchers , 30, 100–101, 211 
 weight-loss nudges 
 basics , 199–201 
 conclusion , 215–16 
 evidence on , 201–3 
 government-sponsored , 201–5 
 introduction , 195–96 
 market vs. government , 212–14 
 market-sponsored , 205–12 
 obese understanding of their 
choices , 198–99, 218n23 
 obesity causes and prevention , 
196–98 
 role for government , 214–15 
 welfare economics, utility function 
and , 40 
 Wells, H.G. , 321 
 Wendel, Steven , 5, 105, 108, 167, 
180, 326 
 Wengraf, Susan , 177 
 Wesabe , 181–82 
 WhichTestWon.com , 111 
 White, Mark D. , 4, 322, 324, 325 
 White House Offi ce of Information 
and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) , 
80, 171 
 Whitman, Glen , 26, 56 
 who should nudge? 
 government nudges , 170–78 
 market nudges , 178–82 
 nudge design and , 160–70 
 overview , 159–60 
 regulatory nudge failure , 182–83 
 Why Nudge ? (Sunstein) , 52, 59n24, 
159 
 Wildavsky, Aaron , 70 
 Williams, Richard , 6–7 
 willpower, social scaffolding and , 30 
 Wilson, Woodrow , 298 
 “Wingspread Consensus Statement” 
(1998) , 70 
 Wolfson, Julia A. , 207 
 Wright, Joshua D. , 79 
 Y 
 Yodlee , 182 
 Z 
 Zolli, Andrew , 69 
 Zuckerman, Laurie , 308 
 Zywicki, Todd , 6, 319, 324 
gerhard.fehr@fehradvice.com
