Jesper B. Sørensen, Stanford University
Capabilities and Organizational Design
When firms succeed, it is often because they possess distinct
organizational capabilities. Such organizations ﬁgure out how to do
something that no other organization can do - either because they
do something totally different, or because they are simply the best at
delivering a certain quality at the lowest possible cost.
Organizational capabilities are the organizational analogue to indi-
vidual skills; just as some people are better at playing the piano than
others, or have unique combinations of skills, some organizations
consistently stand out from their competitors. They can take many
forms: ﬁrms with distinctive capabilities might consistently be more
innovative than others, have the most efﬁcient distribution systems,
deliver consistently better customer service, or produce goods with
fewer defects and greater reliability than anyone else.
Such capabilities can be a sustainable basis for value creation
advantages, provided they are carefully nurtured and maintained
by the ﬁrm’s leaders. Capability-based advantages are distinct from
resource advantages, which derive from resources or assets that you
control and others do not. (Examples of resource advantages include
brand reputation, patents and an installed base of users.) Firms can
and do have both capability- and resource-based advantages.
For example, Apple is well-known
for its product-design and marketing
capabilities, but also has resource-based
advantages derived from the value of
its brand and the size of its installed
base of users.
Knowing that your organization has one or more distinctive
capabilities, however, is different from knowing how to scale them,
or adapt to change. Yet a critical aspect of driving growth for your
venture is understanding how your initial success can be repeated (at
high volumes), how it can be strengthened and improved, and how
it can be protected from imitation by rivals. If your “special sauce”
comes down to the unique chemistry that three member of your team
have with each other, it is exceedingly unlikely that you will be able
to manage growth. Similarly, if you do not understand how your
organization’s capabilities come about, you are more likely to make
mistakes when adapting to change.
Hiring smart people is not sufﬁcient for establishing a capability-


---

2
based advantage. A competitive advantage that is built exclusively
on the superior skills of employees is a tenuous advantage, and
perhaps no advantage at all, since it walks out the door every night.
Consider what happens to professional
basketball teams when their star players
are injured or leave (e.g., LeBron James
and the Cleveland Cavaliers).
And because they can walk out the door, the skilled employees may
capture much of the advantage they create.
The answer to leveraging capability, instead, lies in organizational
design. By thinking carefully about how you structure and run your
organization, you have the potential to deliver on a capability-based
advantage where the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
Moreover, you have the opportunity that build a sustainable business
that thrives and grows, without being dependent for its success on
the skills of particular individual contributors.
This note discusses the central challenge in building organizatiosns—
balancing coordination and motivation—and introduces a model for
assessing alignment in organizational design.
Coordination and Motivation
Before turning to a framework for analyzing organizational
design, take a few minutes to consider the miracle that is modern
organizations.
Imagine that you want to be in the business of creating and selling
ﬁne dining experiences, with gourmet food and ﬁrst-rate service.
Making this happen requires an ability to coordinate a myriad of
tasks: chopping, roasting, frying, saucing and plating the food, seat-
ing patrons, taking their orders, ﬁlling their water and wine glasses,
serving the food, attending to special needs, preparing checks and
processing credit cards. You could try to do that by yourself, but to
do so would be to give up the gains from specialization: someone
who chops vegetables all day will get more done than someone who
moves from chopping to frying to plating to serving. So you will
have a chef, a prep cook, a fry cook, a maitre d’, servers, a bartender,
a sommelier, etc.
Now, however, you have a new challenge: you have to get all of
these people to work together effectively, and to work to the best
of their ability in their roles. If you have ever visited a restaurant
kitchen during the dinner rush (or watched enough reality TV cook-
ing shows), you have a ﬂavor for how challenging this can be.
What does an experienced chef have to do in the kitchen to put
an order of “Sweetbreads, morels, snap peas & ramps” on your plate
15-20 minutes after you ordered it, and still make a proﬁt at $29 a
plate?
The most obvious challenge in the kitchen is coordination: a
Capabilities and Organizational Design
© 2020 Jesper B. Sørensen


---

3
million moving parts, all trying to get to one ﬁnal end, which is the
plate. Coordination means the right people doing the right thing at
the right time, without wasteful duplication. When coordination fails
in a kitchen, the food is overcooked, it arrives late, or they forget to
put the sauce on the side. When it fails at an airline, bags are lost,
planes are delayed, people miss their connections.
But chefs have another responsibility as well: maintaining indi-
vidual motivation. An effective head chef not only needs to ensure
that the cook at the grilling station knows what needs to be grilled
when, she also has to make sure that it is cooked just right—and only
the grill cook can do that. The fry cook has to keep doing his job
even when others do things wrong, work harder when the rush is at
its peak, and keep going even when he has had too much to drink
the night before. Why would either of them want to ensure that the
diner has an exquisite experience, if their rewards are the same when
the diner’s experience is just average? If the members of the kitchen
are insufﬁciently motivated —if the fry cook goes out to smoke a
cigarette during the rush— the kitchen won’t live up to its potential.
In the worst case, the restaurant will end up on a Gordon Ramsay’s
Kitchen Nightmares.
How will you solve this challenge? Most likely, your solution will
For an insightful discussion of the
tension between coordination and
motivation, see John Roberts. The
Modern Firm. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. 2007.
be to build a formal organization, in this case a restaurant. Orga-
nizations are one particular means of coordinating and motivating
people’s activity; markets are another. What distinguishes organiza-
tions and markets is how they accomplish the needed coordination
and motivation. Organizations coordinate and motivate people’s ac-
tivity through authority: the fry cook focuses on frying because that’s
what you tell him to do, and because if he doesn’t, he will likely lose
his job.
Markets, by contrast, accomplish coordination and motivation
through voluntary, mutually beneﬁcial exchange: the butcher sells
meat to you, and you buy from her, because you both feel better off
doing so. As economists since Adam Smith have taught us, well-
functioning markets are wonderfully efﬁcient coordination devices.
But as Nobel-prize winning economists Ronald Coase and Oliver
Williamson explained, they only function well under certain con-
For a useful discussion, see Robert
Gibbons. “Taking Coase Seriously.”
Administrative Science Quarterly 44:
145-157. 1999.
ditions (e.g., when contracts can be speciﬁed and enforced), and
the failures of markets can make organizations a superior means of
coordinating and motivating action.
It is hard to imagine that the exchanges in a restaurant kitchen can
be accomplished through market mechanisms. Instead, the challenge
for the leader is how to use her authority to accomplish the needed
coordination and motivation. Organizational design is the key lever.
For this we turn to the PARC model, introduced by Saloner, Shepard
Capabilities and Organizational Design
© 2020 Jesper B. Sørensen


---

4
and Podolny in Strategic Management (Wiley, 2001).
The PARC Model
Whether you are building a new ﬁrm, or leading an established
company, the question for you as a strategic leader is simple: how
does the design of the organization affect your ability to deliver
superior capabilities, and sustain those capabilities over time?
Thinking about this question is complicated by the fact that exten-
sive research shows that there is no single right organizational design.
Every organization is unique, with different policies, practices, and
cultures. Even among highly successful organizations in the same
industry, there are striking differences in how ﬁrms work. Goldman
Sachs and Morgan Stanley are probably more similar to each other
than they are to Google, but anyone who has worked at both places
will tell you that they are still very different.
With so much potential variety, and so many possible “right”
answers, it is tempting to throw up your hands and say that it is not
worth thinking about. However, this would be a mistake. It will lead
you to make organizational choices without reﬂecting on why you are
making those choices.
What you need is a framework for making sense of the seeming
chaos, for thinking systematically about the building blocks of or-
ganizations, and about how these elements interact with each other
and the ﬁrm’s strategy. We will use the PARC framework, which is
one of many quite similar frameworks for analyzing organizational
design, including David Nadler’s “congruence model,” McKinsey’s
See David A. Nadler. Champions of
Change. New York: Jossey-Bass. 1997.
7S model, etc.
PARC is an acronym for the key elements of organizational design
identiﬁed in the model: People, Architecture and Routines, and
Culture. These are the main elements that you want to focus on
when trying to understand how an organization works and assessing
the degree of organizational and strategic alignment.
Understanding the organization
Some simple questions will help you get a better picture of the
organization:
People
1. What knowledge, skills, and training do employees bring to the
ﬁrm?
Capabilities and Organizational Design
© 2020 Jesper B. Sørensen


---

5
2. What motivates the employees to work? Are they primarily inter-
ested in money, do they emphasize the meaning of their work, or
do they value the community of their fellow employees?
3. What are their expectations? How does the ﬁrm ﬁt into their
career or life plans?
Architecture and Routines
1. How is the formal organization (organizational chart) structured?
Are tasks organized by function, product, or customer? How does
the grouping compare to other ﬁrms in the industry? How is work
coordinated?
2. Is the organizational hierarchy ﬂat, or are there many layers?
3. How are employees compensated? Do they receive a share of
proﬁts (directly or indirectly)?
4. What is the typical decision-making process? How many people
are involved? Is authority delegated or centralized in the organiza-
tion?
5. Are jobs deﬁned very narrowly, or do people cover a wide range
of tasks? Are tasks combined in the same way as at competitors?
6. Is there a lot of teamwork?
7. How does knowledge and information ﬂow? Is the network of
informational ties in the ﬁrm very fragmented? Do some people
act as central hubs or brokers in the network?
Culture
1. What are the fundamental values of people in the organization?
2. What assumptions and beliefs about the world do employees
share?
3. Is there a lot of agreement among employees about what is im-
portant and how the world works? Are these values and beliefs
strongly held?
Critical Tasks
The ﬁnal element of the PARC model is the set of
critical tasks that the organization needs to accomplish in order
to succeed. Critical tasks are the activities that the ﬁrm absolutely
has to perform in order to deliver on its competitive advantage.
Critical tasks are therefore the link between your strategy and your
Capabilities and Organizational Design
© 2020 Jesper B. Sørensen


---

6
organization: they are how the strategy is translated into what needs
to get done, and how, by the organization.
For example, part of Volvo’s perceived quality advantage derives
from designing cars with superior safety features. Discovering and
inventing new technologies for preventing accidents and minimizing
injuries is therefore a critical task for Volvo. By contrast, Toyota built
its perceived quality advantage on producing highly reliable, defect-
free cars. An ability to design and produce cars with a low defect
rate is therefore a critical task for Toyota.
Figure 1: PARC Model
Figure 1 illustrates the interconnectedness of the various aspects of
the PARC model.
Organizational Alignment and Capability
Organizational capabilities arise from and are sustained by well-
aligned organizational designs. The value of the PARC model lies in
giving you a framework for assessing the extent to which the orga-
nization is well aligned, and therefore reinforces the organizations
capabilities.
Alignment can be assessed along two dimensions. Speciﬁcally, an
organization is well-aligned if:
• The elements of organizational design (People, Architecture and
Routines, and Culture) are consistent with each other, and
• The elements of organizational design are aligned with the ﬁrm’s
strategy, through their alignment with the ﬁrm’s critical tasks.
It is through the internal consistency of the elements of organi-
zational design that the whole becomes greater than the sum of its
parts. This is because organizations are integrated systems, where the
performance of one component depends on the other components.
The interaction of the different elements of organizational design is
more important than the elements themselves. If the different compo-
nents conﬂict with each other—are inconsistent or incongruent—the
performance of the system as a whole will suffer. For example, peo-
ple who do not like to be told what to do will not perform well in a
command-and-control structure. Similarly, a strategy that requires
real collaboration among people with different skills will be difﬁcult
to deliver in an organization that has rigid, narrow job deﬁnitions,
and rewards people as individual contributors.
To return to our earlier example, a great chef uses a number of the
elements of organizational design described in the PARC framework,
and creates alignment between them.
• She hires prep cooks and sous-chefs with excellent cooking skills,
Capabilities and Organizational Design
© 2020 Jesper B. Sørensen


---

7
a passion for great food, and perhaps training from a culinary
academy (People).
• Everyone in the kitchen has an assigned set of tasks – a division of
labor (Architecture), and there is alignment between the skills of
the people hired and the jobs they have to do.
• There is a control system, which in part takes the form of the chef
calling out commands, checking the dishes before they go out, and
yelling at people when things go wrong (Routines).
• When yelled at, people ﬁx their mistakes without storming out
(Culture).
• There is a formal hierarchy, with the chef at the top and prep
cooks near the bottom (Architecture).
• There are routines for what happens when orders come in: the
chef calls out “1 veal, 1 duck, 3 swine,” and everyone in the
kitchen knows what to do in response. Prepped vegetables are
thrown in boiling water; meat hits the pan. Plates are prepped and
garnished. Waiters whisk them away.
• Motivation is encouraged through incentives (wages, the hope of
moving up, and the fear of being ﬁred on the spot) (Architecture).
• Effective chefs create a strong set of behavioral norms that shape
how people interact with each other, how they are allowed to
respond to stress, and how they feel about their work (Culture).
A well-run kitchen is one in which the elements of PARC align
with each other to ensure effective coordination with high levels of
motivation.
Conclusion
What you see in the kitchen is a microcosm of the even more com-
plex coordination that is accomplished in organizations every day.
In fact, what you see in the kitchen is a relatively simple form of
coordination — it all takes place largely through face-to-face inter-
action, with people speaking to (or yelling at) each other. Running
the restaurant as a whole is more difﬁcult. While everything is going
on in the kitchen, the front of the house is busy making sure guests
are seated, water glasses are ﬁlled, and orders are taken in a timely
fashion and communicated to the kitchen, etc.
Few if any of you will run a high-end restaurant, much less be
the chef in the kitchen. The organizations you manage and lead
Capabilities and Organizational Design
© 2020 Jesper B. Sørensen


---

8
will in many cases be much larger and more complex – imagine
the complexity of a modern airline. But no matter how large and
complex the ﬁrm, the essential challenge for you is the same: how
best to deliver coordination with high levels of motivation among
everyone involved.
As you surely have experienced, this does not always happen.
Meeting the joint challenge of coordination and motivation is one
thing in a restaurant kitchen, or even in a small startup. Doing it in a
large, complex organization is something else entirely. The Ofﬁce may
have exaggerated the pathologies of big ﬁrms, but it strikes a nerve
because there is truth to it.
The good news, however, is that the elements of organizational
design are powerful tools for accomplishing the challenge of opti-
mizing coordination and motivation simultaneously. Attention to
organizational design is important, because capability-based ad-
vantages reside in the elements of PARC, their alignment with each
other and the ﬁrm’s Critical Tasks. In other words, a ﬁrm may have a
competitive advantage because it has higher levels of internal consis-
tency than its competitors. In addition, a ﬁrm may have a competitive
advantage because it has made different, aligned choices about
organizational design. By contrast, when leaders ﬁnd themselves
continually facing the same organizational problems, the root cause
almost always lies in misalignment between the elements of PARC. In
short, alignment is critical.
Capabilities and Organizational Design
© 2020 Jesper B. Sørensen
