Version of Record: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0019850120301851
Manuscript_83ae3c785baaa34ede56fdd6157d87c2
The Digital Marketing Capabilities Gap:
Empirical Evidence, Managerial Shortcomings, and Future Research Streams
Dennis Herhausen*
KEDGE Business School
Domaine de Luminy
Rue Antoine Bourdelle, 13009
13009 Marseille, France
E-mail: dennis.herhausen@kedgebs.com
Dario Miočević
University of Split
Faculty of Economics
Cvite Fiskovica 5
21000 Split, Croatia
E-mail: dmiocevi@efst.hr
Robert E. Morgan
Cardiff University
Cardiff Business School
Colum Drive
Cardiff CF10 3EU, United Kingdom
E-mail: morganre@cardiff.ac.uk
Copenhagen Business School
Department of Marketing
Solbjerg Plads 3
DK-2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark
E-Mail: reb.marktg@cbs.dk
Mirella H.P. Kleijnen
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
School of Business and Economics
De Boelelaan 1105
1081 HV Amsterdam, Netherlands
E-mail: mirella.kleijnen@vu.nl
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to the marketing managers that provided us with primary data allowing
us to develop an agenda for future research that is distilled from the current challenges confronting industrial
marketing in firms. We thank Special Area Editor, John Nicholson and the Review Team for their constructive and
helpful suggestions on previous drafts of this manuscript. We are also grateful to the following collaborators for
discussions that have helped to shape the formulations in this manuscript: Chad Autry, Anthony di Benedetto, Pierre
Berthon, Fu-Mei Chuang, Andreas Eggert, Ruud Frambach, Lilla Hortoványi, Kerry Hudson, Mathew Hughes, Paul
Hughes, Christos Koritos, Adam Lindgreen, Luigi de Luca, Neil Morgan, Matthew Robson, Robert Spencer, Roland
Szabo, and Douglas Vorhies.
*Corresponding author
© 2020 published by Elsevier. This manuscript is made available under the Elsevier user license
https://www.elsevier.com/open-access/userlicense/1.0/
1. Introduction
Over the past two decades, digitalization has revolutionized not only consumer marketing but
also industrial marketing. E-Commerce, mobile devices, smart products, the Internet of Things
(IoT), and Artificial Intelligence all fall within the broader concept of digital marketing which
includes all activities, institutions, and processes facilitated by digital technologies for creating,
communicating, and delivering value for customers (American Marketing Association, 2013).
The growing importance of digital marketing in the industrial context is underscored in several
recent B2B marketing trends (e.g., Janda, 2018; Gupta, 2018; O’Neill, 2018). For example,
industrial marketers intensify their content marketing, employ more often marketing automation
platforms, increasingly use chatbots for customer interactions, and search for new prospects on
social media sites. Against these developments, our paper seeks to advance the understanding of
how digitalization has shaped and will reformulate marketing in industrial firms.
While some researchers have already offered literature reviews of digital, social media, and
mobile marketing (e.g., Kannan & Li, 2017; Lamberton & Stephen, 2016; Yadav & Pavlou,
2014), all these studies exhibit three shortcomings that prevent them to fully inform the industrial
marketing field. First, these literature reviews have an implicit business to consumer focus,
largely neglecting the specific context of industrial firms. Notable exceptions are reviews that
focus on subtopics within industrial marketing such as social media use of industrial firms (Salo,
2018) or the impact of digitalization on salespeople (Singh et al., 2019). Second, most attention
has been given to the tremendous opportunities digital marketing presents, with little attention on
the actual related competences that firms need to be successful. We believe that resource-based
theory has the potential to bridge this gap and to guide industrial managers on how to benefit
from digitalization. Viewing industrial firms as a bundle of capabilities (Barney, 1991) helps to
identify, build, and sustain sources of competitive advantage in the new normal of our digital era.
1
Third, existing literature reviews focus on published research only, thereby neglecting the
accelerating emergent of “new” digital capabilities in managerial practice. This is troublesome,
especially given the speed at which digital technologies evolve and impact business
opportunities.
We address these gaps by reviewing 129 high-quality articles that investigate digital
marketing capabilities and related resources, by confronting 169 managers with the results of the
literature review, and by building a future research agenda for the industrial marketing field. Our
objectives for this paper are three-fold. First, we address the “what do we know of digital
marketing capabilities” question of prior research and develop a framework for industrial
marketing research which highlights how the literature on digital capabilities and resources has
evolved over the past two decades. Second, we pose the question of “which digital marketing
capabilities will drive future value” and respond by creating insights from a management survey.
Finally, we consider “how can the digital marketing capabilities gap be reconciled” by revealing
several shortcomings of extant research that have hitherto constrained its relevance and created
points of disconnect between academia and practice; thereby informing our agenda for
interesting, relevant, and forward-looking digital marketing research for industrial firms.
2. Conceptual development
Resource-based theory offers a valuable framework to investigate digital business
strategies and their consequential competitive advantages (Bharadwaj et al., 2013). More
generally, resource-based theory explains the development of a firm’s competitive advantage
based on capabilities (or competences), defined as a set of “skills and resources which enable the
company to achieve superior performance” (Harmsen & Jensen, 2004, p. 535) in a way that is
difficult for competitors to imitate (Barney, 1991). Although the industrial marketing literature
2
has often employed the resource-based approach as an important theoretical platform (e.g.,
Morgan et al., 2019), it is surprisingly scarce in digital marketing research.
In line with Guesalaga et al. (2018), we distinguish resources from capabilities to analyze
digital marketing in industrial firms. Helfat and Peteraf (2003, p. 999) describe a resource as “an
asset or input to production (tangible or intangible) that an organization owns, controls, or has
access to on a semi-permanent basis,” and a capability as “the ability of an organization to
perform a coordinated set of tasks, utilizing organizational resources, for the purpose of
achieving a particular end result.” The distinction of resources and capabilities offers an
appropriate lens for studying digital marketing because its success depends on the management
of assets (e.g., a large data set) and the ability to undertake specific tasks and processes (e.g.,
machine learning to uncover meaningful insights). Consequently, we define a digital marketing
resource as a digital-related marketing asset (tangible or intangible) that a B2B firm owns,
controls, or has access to on a semi-permanent basis. Moreover, a digital marketing capability is
the ability of a B2B firm to perform a coordinated set of digital-related tasks (operational or
dynamic), utilizing digital resources, for achieving a competitive advantage.
Importantly, in the digital context, resources often fail to meet the theoretical requirements
to be classified as a resource namely being inimitable, rare, valuable, and non-substitutable
(Lambrecht & Tucker 2015). For example, data that are available due to user-generated content
reflecting digital behavior across the Internet can be scraped with low costs from many sites, and
other sites sell their user data or allow firms to take advantage of user data through targeted
advertisement. Consequently, such data are neither inimitable nor rare, and due to its access by
competitors not necessarily valuable. Given multiple providers of data and access (e.g., Google
versus Facebook), such data are neither non-substitutable. Indeed, the unstable history of digital
business with examples such as Yahoo or Netscape offers little evidence that the mere possession
3
of digital resources is sufficient for value creation and a competitive advantage. The focus of a
digital marketing strategy should therefore be on how to use digital resources as inputs which, in
turn, create capabilities from which value and competitive advantage can be derived.
Consequently, we mainly focus in our review on digital marketing capabilities because these
endow firms with the means to adapt to market changes that stem from digitalization, new
technologies, and changing consumer behavior (Day, 2011). We thus complement existing
reviews1 by focusing on digital marketing capabilities for industrial firms by asking: (1) what do
we know of digital marketing capabilities; (2) which digital marketing capabilities will drive
future value; and, (3) how can the digital marketing capabilities gap be reconciled.
3. Literature review
3.1. Identifying relevant articles
We conducted a systematic literature review to explore the capabilities that underpin digital
marketing in industrial firms. Our goal was to identify and classify all critical digital marketing
capabilities (and resources). Consistent with other systematic reviews, we limit our review to
high-quality sources that align with the study context. To this end, all sources needed to
explicitly fall within the scope of marketing and to ensure that all articles included met a
threshold of quality as determined by journal centrality and academic standing. We thus
considered the following nine journals for the literature review: Industrial Marketing
Management; International Journal of Research in Marketing; Journal of Business Research;
Journal of Interactive Marketing, Journal of Marketing Research; Journal of Marketing; Journal
of Personal Selling & Sales Management; and Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science. In
1 Yadav and Pavlou (2014) focus on marketing in computer-mediated environments and review literature in both
marketing and information systems. The review by Lamberton and Stephen (2016) focuses on consumer
psychology, motivations, and expressions in digital environments. The review by Kannan and Li (2017) focuses on
the touchpoints in the marketing process where digital technologies are having and will have a significant impact.
4
line with other reviews of digital marketing (e.g., Kannan & Li, 2017; Lamberton & Stephen
2016), we considered all articles published after 2000 until the time of this review (i.e., mid-
2019)2. A total of 129 articles qualified for extraction and synthesis, with the majority of articles
being attributable to Industrial Marketing Management (99 articles, 77 percent of all articles).3
3.2. Classifying digital marketing capabilities
All digital marketing capabilities and resources in each of the 129 articles were classified
according to their broader topic. Thus, we coded each article’s constructs of interest into a set of
common topics for the purposes of our analysis. The authors resolved any differences of the
coding scheme through iteration and discussion. We identified 147 appearances of specific
digital marketing capabilities or resources for industrial firms. Several topics of domain-specific
capabilities were condensed and revised. For example, capabilities such as “use of social
networking sites,” “social media messaging,” and “social media knowledge” were classified as
“social media capabilities.” These efforts resulted in seven first-order topics that we subsequently
distilled to four second-order themes. Table 1 presents the research topics and themes, the
number of appearances per topic, and illustrative examples for capabilities and resources.
Given clear and apparent themes that emerged from the topics considered during the census
period, we use four intervals to characterize the shifting focus of industrial marketing research on
digital marketing capabilities. In line with previous literature reviews (e.g., Guesalaga et al.,
2 We conducted searches in citation databases for the respective journals (EBSCO, Science Direct, Emerald, and
Web of Knowledge), using the following search terms in the abstract: (“Internet” OR “electronic” OR “online” OR
“digital” OR “social media” OR “mobile”) AND (“industrial” OR “B2B” OR “business to business”). This initial
keyword search resulted in a set of 225 articles published in the eight journals, which we then filtered based on
their relevance. All papers not addressing capabilities or resources and all papers without an industrial marketing
context were excluded. The authors resolved any differences through iteration and discussion, with reference to the
full text of the articles under consideration.
3 Additional articles appeared in Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management (12 articles), Journal of
Marketing (6 articles), Journal of Business Research (5 articles), Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science (5
articles), and Journal of Interactive Marketing (2 articles).
5
2018; Lamberton & Stephen, 2016), we divided our census period into different intervals (see
Figure 1 and Table 2). Studies published from 2000–2004 predominantly focus on the rise of the
online channel, accounting for 77% of all digital capabilities considered during the census period.
While many studies published from 2005–2009 still investigated the online channel, its interplay
with other channels gained importance. Many publications shifted its focus to multichannel
capacities, in particular to the coordination and integration of the online channel with other
channels. During the years 2010–2014, deepening digital relationships was the main theme. This
includes both interfirm relationships and intrafirm relationships to employees. Contemporary
studies published from 2015–2019 are characterized with three dominant topics, namely mobile,
social media, and digital technologies. Similar to the B2C domain, it is apparent that the total
number of publications devoted to digital capabilities in industrial marketing has increased
considerably in more recent years. Our literature review continues with an explication of the four
digital marketing capability themes.
——— Insert Table 1, Table 2, and Figure 1 here ———
3.2.1. Channels
Most of the earlier research on digital capabilities falls under the first theme of channels—
consisting of online channel (48 articles), multichannel (12 articles), and mobile capabilities
(three articles)—defined as the customer contact points or the mediums through which the firm
and the industrial customer interact. Out of the 63 articles, 26 are conceptual; 6 use qualitative
methods; and 31 articles use quantitative methods. The intellectual legacy of channel capabilities
is dominated by the conceptual/theoretical understanding how the Internet provides a new
gateway for industrial buyer-seller exchanges through various types of emerging online channel
capabilities and resources. The advent of the Internet inherently transformed the conception how
B2B transactions were conducted (Sharma, 2002). For example, industrial marketing researchers
6
financial performance (Simões, Singh, & Perin, 2015). examined how Internet use enhances firm level processes and performance (Avlontis &
Karayanni, 2000) and changes marketing activities such as managing sales (Long, Tellefsen, &
Lichtenthal, 2007) and communications (Lichtenthal & Eliaz, 2003).
Scholars also discussed the plausibility of adding web portals as a new resource to B2B
strategies (Clarke III & Flaherty, 2003). For example, Perry and Bodkin’s (2002) study reveals
crucial determinants of how deep industrial firms engage in website marketing. In terms of
managing the firm’s own website as a channel, Deeter-Schmelz and Kennedy (2002) investigated
how firms utilize the Internet as a communication tool in buying-selling dyads. Ellinger, Lynch,
and Hansen (2003) demonstrate that industrial firms with higher investments in website
interactivity witness higher sales revenues payoff. Besides for communication, scholars have
found that industrial firms that use websites for expressing their corporate brands report higher
Most recently, others have revealed the
value of corporate blogging as an emerging capability for B2B professionals (Thakur & AlSaleh,
2018), potentially signaling more research on emerging communication capabilities.
The increasing diffusion of the Internet in the B2B sphere has enabled many industrial
firms to establish their own online channels which resulted in disintermediation and the genesis
of e-commerce. In an early phase, researchers started to investigate the motivation and abilities of
industrial firms to participate in e-commerce as sellers (Grewal, Corner, & Mehta, 2001) and
buyers (Kennedy & Deeter-Schmelz, 2001). As e-commerce started to gain momentum,
researchers engaged in revealing the structural idiosyncrasies (Dou & Chou, 2002) and
underlying marketing capabilities (Siu, 2002) of successful e-commerce adoption. Furthermore,
studies show the importance of the IT infrastructure in determining e-commerce activities
(Claycomb, Iyer, & Germain, 2005; Min & Galle, 2003).
7
As a new form of market making, authors discussed the (dis)advantages (Jap, 2002) as
well as the cost saving potentials (Emiliani, 2004) of online auctions and reverse auctions.
Online (reverse) auctions have been considered market making mechanism that disrupts
traditional buyer-seller industrial relationships by putting the price in the spotlight as a critical
cue in making buying decision (Emiliani, 2005). By furthering the principle of “cost savings”,
authors warned that it is possible for online auctions to enhance long-term relationships between
its constituents while simultaneously lowering the costs of transactions (Daly & Nath, 2005).
At the same time while entering the online domain, industrial firms continued to maintain
their traditional channels. This led researchers to scrutinize how to successfully develop
multichannel capabilities (Sharma & Mehrotra, 2007) while successfully integrating and
optimizing all online and offline channels (Rosenbloom, 2007). B2B firms that extend to online
channels face challenges of optimization in their general business strategy but witness higher
financial performance (Cheng et al., 2007; Kabadayi, Eyuboglu, & Thomas, 2007). In parallel,
scholars made first attempts to unfold what drives the B2B buyer’s decision to engage in
multichannel purchasing (Merrilees & Fenech, 2007) as well as B2B sellers’ view how they
could exploit the B2B multichannel engagement (Müller et al., 2018).
With growing importance of the Internet, the phenomenon of re-intermediation emerged
where new types of online intermediaries in the form of electronic marketplaces appeared, and
industrial firms need to build capabilities to deal with them. As a new phenomenon, scholars
sought to assess the incidence of electronic marketplaces employed by industrial firms (Fu et al.,
2008). Following on from this work, empirical evidence became a substantive means of
understanding when e-marketplace makers should engage in specific governance mechanism
with a goal of enhancing e-marketplace performance (Grewal, Chakravarty, & Saini, 2010). Most
recently, scholars have investigated the evolution of two-sided online platforms, which
8
simultaneously operate in both B2C and B2B streams (Muzellec, Ronteau, & Lambkin, 2016).
By identifying that the supply side of two-sided platforms is under-researched, these scholars
contributed to better understanding the opportunities and challenges for businesses that offer
products and services through such platforms (Lim, 2017). Concurrently, scholars found
evidence that engagement in B2B online platforms creates early mover advantage benefits but
only for short period (Deng & Wang, 2016).
A small number of studies have explored the potential dark side associated with B2B
online exchanges. These report that conflicts may surface with the implementation of demand-
side e-commerce solutions (Osmonbekov, Bello, & Gilliland, 2009). Since privacy may be
violated, researchers have examined how to enhance trust in e-commerce settings (Luo, 2002).
However, this work has been transcended given ubiquitous computing in B2B markets (e.g., with
IoT technologies) and more recent investigations on data privacy in B2C settings (Martin, Borah,
& Palmatier, 2017), industrial marketing research is needed that addresses this important topic.
As technology advanced, mobile media became an important channel for B2B firms. For
example, Spreer and Rauschnabel (2016) identified six factors that inhibit the use of mobile
devices in sales assistance. In addition, others have investigated the benefits of using mobile apps
as a resource for customer engagement and found that such initiatives result in higher sales
through empowering business customer to participate (Gill, Sridhar, & Grewal, 2017). Recent
studies have started to shed light on the multichannel capabilities needed to integrate mobile and
social media into a firm’s existing marketing channels (Thaichon et al., 2018).
3.2.2. Social media
A second theme, associated with 31 articles, focuses on digital capabilities that are specific
to social media, which are defined as digital communication platforms and services that allow
parties to connect with one another, to share information, and engage in dialogue. These include
9
social networking sites, collaborative projects, blogs, content communities, and virtual worlds
(Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010). Industrial marketing publications related to social media capabilities
started to appear after 2010, and research on this topic was substantially stimulated by a special
issue in the Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management in 2012 and two special sections of
Industrial Marketing Management in 2016 and 2019. Although a relatively young research
stream, social media in the field of industrial marketing has already evoked an informative
literature review (Salo, 2017). While that literature review sheds light on the opportunities of
social media for industrial firms, it does not address social media-related capabilities and
resources as we do. Out of the 31 articles identified for our review, four are conceptual, seven
use qualitative methods, and 20 articles employ quantitative methods.
The preponderance of articles investigate the capability of industrial firms to use social
media as a marketing tool and its related resources (26 articles), on either the employee or the
organizational level. On the employee level (i.e., salespersons, 14 articles), studies have mostly
identified the expected utility, usability, and usefulness as primary reasons for employees to use
social media, and improved market knowledge and a higher communication quality as the direct
outcomes of social media use. Illustrative of this stream of research is Itani et al.’s (2017) study
in which the authors examine attitude toward social media usefulness as an antecedent and
competitive intelligence collection as well as adaptive selling behavior as outcomes of social
media use. Other antecedents for employees’ social media usage are individual proficiency and
familiarity with social media tools as well as the organizational social media expertise
(Guesalaga, 2016). All studies on the employee level report positive effects of social media use
on relevant outcomes (e.g., Ogilvie et al., 2018; Rodriguez et al., 2012).
Research on the organizational level largely mirrors research on the employee level (12
articles). Perceived usefulness and ease of use motivate B2B firms to adopt social media
10
(Siamagka et al., 2015), and higher communication quality is an expected outcomes of social
media use (Wang et al., 2016). Moreover, organizational social media use has been conceptually
and qualitatively linked to co-creating value (Trainor, 2012), interfirm cooperation (Chirumalla
et al., 2018), and network creation (Quinton & Wilson, 2016). However, although all studies on
the organizational level expect positive effects of social media use, no study so far has quantified
a potential organizational performance effect for B2B firms. This might be the reason for an
interesting paradox. Despite the high interest in social media for industrial firms in academia and
practice (e.g., O'Neill, 2018), an early study found that a majority of B2B companies considered
social media use as irrelevant for them (Michaelidou et al., 2011), and a more recent survey
found little evidence that this has changed: B2B managers perceived social media as less
important and less effective than other managers (Iankova et al., 2019). Moreover, there is little
research on the microfoundations of social media use, in other words the processes and routines
that enable B2B firms to engage in social media conversations.
Four articles investigate the content management capabilities of industrial firms, all on the
organizational level. These articles shed light on the distinct semantic approaches (Mehmet &
Clarke, 2016), distinct functions (Leek et al., 2016), and distinct communication strategies
(Swani et al., 2014) that underpin social media messages for B2B firms. Moreover, investigating
different communication strategies in business markets, Swani et al. (2017) found that the
inclusion of the brand name, functional and emotional appeals, and information search cues
increases the popularity of B2B messages. Research is silent on the topic of what guides
salespeople in their individual content management strategies when they use social media
relevant for customer relationships (in particular LinkedIn). Finally, one article considers B2B
online reviews as an important resource for industrial firms (Steward et al., 2018). However, no
11
further research is apparent on this valuable topic which lags the B2C context and for which
there is no direct comparison (e.g., Bruhn et al., 2014).
3.2.3. Digital relationships
The third theme is devoted to digital relationship capabilities which we define as the
dynamic and ongoing interactions between trusted parties that are interdependent and enable
value to be appropriated by any actor. Twenty seven articles are attributable to this theme from
our review. The majority of these were quantitative studies from a range of research designs (16
articles) through to qualitative studies including content analyses as well as case methods and
interviews (9 articles). Two of these articles reported conceptual insights from agenda setting
reviews on supply chain coordination (Garcia-Dastugue & Lambert, 2003) and sales
management training (Lassk et al., 2012) in B2B relationship building.
Digital marketing capabilities are largely derived from sources devoted to interfirm
relationships as well as relationships with employees. These include digital supply chain
management, managing virtual networks, collaboration marketplaces, governance mechanisms,
and customer relationship management as capabilities related to interfirm relationships, and
intra-firm relationship management, employee training, and the digital sales interface as
employee capabilities. Although the majority of the articles considered relationships at the inter-
organizational interface(s) as the unit of analysis (23 articles), 4 articles examined relationships
at the individual employee level. Scholarly attention was originally devoted to firm capabilities
in their upstream digital relationships with the purpose of improving buyer-supplier relations
(Leek et al., 2003), creating more timely communication (MacDonald & Smith, 2004),
coordinating network performance (Gupta et al., 2005, 2006), and ensuring improved supply
chain coordination (Garcia-Dastugue & Lambert, 2003). The early stages of B2B relationships
are characteristically chaotic for both sides of the exchange (La Rocca et al., 2016).
12
Relationships build through interactions and, evidently, digital technologies have provided the
means to improve search, selection, and communication with upstream partners thereby
facilitating greater coordination. Initially, digital technologies enabled firms to create
rudimentary capabilities for instrumental purposes designed primarily to improve information
sharing within supply chains (Bharadwaj et al., 2013). As relationships consolidated between
firms, our knowledge of the impact of firms’ capabilities with digital marketing communications
have been evaluated. Evidence indicates that personal relationships still drive interactivity, but
the merits of digital relationships are that they are more favorable than impersonal
communications because they allow rationality to be exhibited and reciprocal feedback to be
created which are important drivers of relational satisfaction at scale (Murphy & Sashi, 2018).
The nature of this work coincided with the greater adoption of technology from upstream
coordination to begin to span the value chain. Thus, midstream digital relationships came to the
fore by examining virtual networks, collaboration marketplaces, and governance mechanisms for
collaboration. Topics that emerged here included empirical works investigating e-market
orientation (Shaltoni & West, 2010), central actors in platform relationships (Lacko et al., 2019),
and governance mechanisms in electronic markets (Grewal et al., 2010) as interfirm capabilities.
Of note here are the lateral and network relationships that Pagani and Pardo (2017)
identify. Their work revealed that digital marketing capabilities enable three forms of related
parallel effects being: (1) activities-linked centered digitalization leading to the optimization and
coordination of existing activities; (2) resource-ties centered digitalization leading to the
combinations of new resources which, in turn, generate new activities; and, (3) actor-bonds
centered digitalization leading to new bonds among actors not previously linked (p. 191).
Furthermore, Wang et al. (2011) investigated collaborative (as opposed to closed) electronic
logistics marketplaces, which have evolved significantly since this time, and were among the first
13
to analyze how such a system can be configured through the marketing integrations capabilities
of information processing and collaborative structures.
Downstream digital relationships provide the greatest number of articles in the digital
relationships literature because fundamentally, “one of the most important tasks in marketing is
to create and communicate value to customers to drive their satisfaction, loyalty, and
profitability” (Kumar & Reinartz, 2016, p. 36). Moreover, particular challenges and opportunities
exist for delivering customer value using digital relationships in the B2B setting. In this regard,
B2B relationships go deeper—B2B journeys are longer and more complex and typically involve
many individuals; customization is widespread leading to greater coordination demands; and, the
stakes tends to be very high in B2B digital relationships (Maechler et al., 2017).
These downstream articles are generally more recent and provide a consolidation and
synthesis of many of the previous burgeoning literature streams. The preponderance of topics
reflect the ‘outside-in’ perspective in B2B marketing and are devoted to sales-based digital
capabilities. These included: return on engagement activities within B2B relationships
(Guesalaga, 2016); customer relationship management in post-sales service (Agnihotri et al.,
2017); as well as digital sales resources deployed to identify franchisees (López-Fernández,
2018). Sales-based studies are complemented by intra-firm digital relationships such as the work
by Li et al. (2018) on internal branding, as well as the higher-order exploitation of resources
deployed to deliver innovation (Zahay et al., 2018; Hardwick & Anderson, 2019) and advanced
coordination, collaboration, and integration capabilities between firms and platforms
(Mallapragada et al., 2015; Lacko et al., 2019). It is clear that the diffusion of the mature digital
relationship adoption practices in B2C markets are diffusing to B2B markets, albeit at a slower
rate. For example, Gill et al. (2017) investigate a mobile app that a tool manufacturer provides
for free to engage its buyers and find that the app increased annual sales revenues by up to 23%.
14
They identify, importantly, that the form and nature of organizational buyer participation
intensity is the critical mechanism to deliver these returns.
Regarding employee digital marketing capabilities, scholars have primarily considered
individual competency of their roles fulfilling organizational routines. These efforts have
explored the extent to which greater investments in sales training (Sarin, 2010) and
understanding how technological capabilities could support the sales environment (Marshall et
al, 2012). Furthermore, Lassk et al. (2012) explain how training influences a salesperson’s ability
to manage technological change in the firm’s sales strategy. Specifically, they find program
formality is important to trigger training effectiveness provided the training is mandatory. Some
resistance to digital marketing capabilities in sales was evident among older salespeople but
overall when engaged, the training effectiveness delivers a series of behavioral- and outcome-
based performance indicators.
3.2.4. Digital technologies
The fourth research theme consists of 18 articles focusing on digital technologies. Eight of
these articles are conceptual; four use qualitative methods; and six articles use quantitative
methods. At the start of the century with electronic markets still being relatively novel, Grewal et
al. (2001) focused on basic IT capabilities and discussed the importance of the industrial firm’s
IT capabilities in order to be able to participate in such markets and to deal with the dynamic
environment that often characterizes the digital world. As with any introduction of new
technology, it is important that firms are ready to embrace such technologies (Vize et al., 2013).
At that time, some firms were evidently more technology ready than others, which impacts the
way they are able to capitalize on these new opportunities.
Later publications reflected the development and increasing progress of electronic
commerce, becoming later known as digital, technologies. Kurizovich (2013) finds that sales
15
technology resources are important for lead sales management in online channels. Such IT
systems are designed specifically for sales processes and allow for more effective information
management by the sales force. Sales organizations have been transitioning from traditional,
outside sales forces, i.e., field sales, to structures that facilitate online sales management
(Thaichon et al., 2018). The accompanying Internet technologies have taken fundamental data
management software to intelligent, digitized selling, providing the resources needed for
customer-centric relationship management. Järvinen and Taiminen (2016) concur that marketing
automation plays an important role in increasing high-quality sales leads and the quality of such
resources can substantially impact customer satisfaction and loyalty (Kingshott et al., 2019).
Automation can significantly contribute to the generation of content that is personalized
and thus more relevant to the target audience, increasing chances of conversion. Moreover, in
order to fully exploit the potential of digital marketing, it is important that industrial firms are
able to assess how such activities impact performance. This calls for an alignment between the
firm strategy and the metrics selected; a strong knowledge base and skills to utilize web
analytics; and an organization structure that embeds a marketing metrics system as a resource
(Järvinen & Karjaluoto, 2015).
Social communication technologies extend sales technologies to another level. While both
theory and practice seem to be vastly skewed towards B2C applications, B2B practice is
reorienting itself towards this new way of acquisition, lead generation, and relationship
management (Janda, 2018). The use of social communication technology in B2B is not new, but
they have often been considered secondary to more traditional means of communication. Yet, the
technologies underpinning social media offer new ways to connect firms, i.e., sales managers and
their customers (Marshall et al., 2012). Social media can transform both the sales structures and
processes (Moncrief 2017) and extend the way relationships can be facilitated as their reach can
16
be larger. As Coreynen et al. (2017) point out, digital technologies are an essential resource to
support this transition, where different resource configurations can offer distinctly different
advantages that range from industrial, commercial, and value-based propositions.
While social media enables human interaction via a technological interface, recent
developments in IoT technology presents new configurations including machine-to-machine
interactions (Leminen et al., 2019). IoT resources and capabilities allow for new, modular
configurations, where components that can interact with each other independent of human
intervention, which are likely to radically transform interactions between people, as well as
people and objects (Sousa & Rocha, 2019). IoT technology can provide a supporting backbone in
B2B communications where information can be exchanged between objects that deliver input for
example for maintenance and support (Falkenreck & Wagner, 2017).
When designed well, this can create smart ecosystems for customized solutions, which is
often essential in B2B settings and helps manufacturing companies in their transition of moving
from sales to services. For example, Suppatvech et al. (2019) develop four archetypes of IoT-
enabled servitized business models, where IoT is used as a resource to create additional functions
such as personalized services or to connect customers and assets in smart ways (e.g., location-
based services). While there are plentiful examples of IoT solutions in B2C by now (Ng &
Wakenshaw, 2017), B2B firms are recognizing this potential as well. This is likely to lead to new
business opportunities but also new risks, as loci of control are likely to shift (Sousa & Rocha,
2019). IoT also can be used as a resource for facilitating new servitized models that are user-
based (Suppatvech et al., 2019) and thus particularly interesting for any type of subscription-
based payment. Recently, Philips Lighting collaborated with Deloitte to create an IoT based
system for one of the Deloitte offices, where Deloitte no longer buys lights, but a lighting
solution that is owned and maintained by Philips, challenging the company to offer the most
17
sustainable solution. Finally, in the solution-oriented business model IoT allows firms to offer
integrated solutions specifically tailored to the customer’s needs. In B2B this typically translates
to maintenance and support as well as optimization solutions, where IoT can create unique
configurations to more effectively build such solutions to support B2B firms in their core
activities and processes. Key to the success of IoT technologies the perceived credibility and
usefulness of such technologies by B2B channel partners (Falkenreck & Wagner, 2017).
Artificial intelligence presents firms yet again with a technology that can significantly
impact sales, both in the offline and online environment (Moncrief, 2017, Sousa & Rocha, 2019).
Within that, big data has also led to new technologies and techniques to analyze new types of
data, such as image, text or speech in different ways than before (Sousa & Rocha, 2019). By
means of machine learning techniques, big data and predictive analysis that take future forward
approach, firms are able to improve for example activities along the sales funnel, such as
targeting and positioning (Syama & Sharmab, 2018) but also customer churn management and
eCRM (Gordini & Veglio, 2017). While AI is typically recognized as an essential element in
B2B production and manufacturing, the emergence of robotics in customer-facing activities
cannot be ignored (Martínez-López & Casillas, 2013). Today, robots start to work along-side
humans, and at times even independently in various points of the value chain, including the front
office (Sousa & Rocha, 2019). Ultimately, these technologies are indicative of a shift in decision
making from humans to machines (Syama & Sharmab, 2018).
Finally, while the concept of virtual reality emerged already a few decades ago, only in
recent years the true business potential of virtual reality technology for industrial firms has been
recognized. Academic research has only begun to investigate the impact of virtual reality usage
can reshape B2B firms and their market performance (Boyd & Koles, 2019). Virtual reality
literally takes IT capabilities from 2D to 3D, with recent breakthroughs in this field offering a
18
new level of realism to this technology. VR has shifted from a technical to an experiential focus,
where “VR applications capture three-dimensional, computer-generated spaces that enable vivid
and multi-sensory experiences within rich media settings” (Boyd and Koles 2019).
4. Management interviews and survey
4.1. Data collection
A two-phase data collection process captured the managerial view on the current
development and future importance of the digital marketing capabilities. Phase 1 was aimed at
evaluating and where needed refining, adjusting, and completing the list of capabilities and
technologies derived from the literature review. This round consisted of a roundtable discussion
of the first author with 17 managers during a university workshop. Participants all worked in
marketing, sales, or key account manager roles and operated in various industries, including
manufacturing, IT and technology, and professional services. Confronted with the four themes
and an initial list of digital marketing capabilities and technologies based on the literature review,
the managers renamed some of the capabilities and technologies (e.g., platform instead of E-
marketplace), grouped some of the capabilities and technologies (e.g., channel integration and
channel coordination into multi-channel capability), excluded capabilities and technologies that
they deemed irrelevant in 2019 (e.g., E-readiness), and added new capabilities and technologies
(e.g., scraping and web crawling). The first author then reviewed the revised list of the digital
marketing capabilities, resolved any disagreements among participants in a group discussion, and
consolidated all suggested changes. The Appendix contains the list of the digital marketing
capabilities and technologies used in the subsequent survey.
Phase 2 aimed to contrast the view of B2B and B2C managers on their digital marketing
capabilities and technologies because previous research has found meaningful differences in how
consumer and industrial firms approach digital topics (Iankova et al. 2019). We used an online
19
survey in which participants considered the current situation in their firm and rated how well
each digital capability or technology is developed within their firm (1 = not at all developed / 7 =
fully developed), as well as the future importance of each digital capability or technology over
the next five years (1 = further development is not important at all / 7 = further development is of
uttermost importance). Additionally, they selected what they believed to be the most important
digital capabilities or technologies for their marketing from a drop-down list (participants were
provided with the opportunity to choose as many capabilities or technologies as they wished).
We also asked all participants whether any important digital marketing capabilities or
technologies were missing in the list and they were provided with an open option to enter this.
A link to the questionnaire was distributed to managers via LinkedIn on the authors’
profiles and via email among B2B and B2C managers from an alumni panel of the first author’s
university. A total of 169 managers fully completed the questionnaire (106 B2B and 63 B2C
managers). Table 3 contains the summary profiles of the survey respondents.
——— Insert Table 3 here ———
4.2. Survey results
When comparing the data on the actual state and future development, both B2B and B2C
respondents clearly agree that almost all digital marketing capabilities will become more
instrumental in the future (see Table 4). With regard to their currently most important digital
capabilities for their marketing activities, both B2B and B2C managers selected their own
company website and multichannel capability most often (Table 5). Additional channel-related
capabilities that were prominent include the use of third-party e-commerce for selling and
providing a mobile app for customers. Regarding social media, the B2B managers named social
media for organizational communication, taking advantage of positive customer reviews and
reacting appropriately on negative customer reviews, salespersons’ social media competency, and
20
engaging in digital business communities. The importance of digital relationships is highlighted
by the identification of social and digital CRM technologies, digital selling tools, and
implementing digital change as important capabilities. The importance of advanced data
analytics relates to digital technologies.
Moreover, when we compare the current development and future importance of digital
marketing capabilities, we encounter meaningful gaps in many capabilities. Many industrial
marketers are being challenged by a deluge of data that is well beyond the capacity of their firms
to comprehend and use, as pointed out by the gaps regarding big data infrastructure for machine
generated data and unstructured data, big data visualization, artificial intelligence and machine
learning, and advanced data analytics (Table 6). Moreover, the survey revealed multichannel
capability gaps, also in terms of providing a mobile app for customers, digital selling tools, and
IoT technology. In addition, B2B firms have a capability gap when it comes to taking advantage
of positive customer reviews.
We also found some meaningful differences between the B2B vs. B2C perspective on
digital marketing capabilities. Capabilities related to mobile apps, the management of customer
reviews, and digital selling tools are much more developed in B2C firms, and B2B firms should
learn from more advanced firms and adapt the obtained insights to the industrial context. The
same applies to big data-related insights, such as machine generated data, cloud computing, and
scraping and web crawling. On the contrary, B2B firms seemed to be more advanced than B2C
firms in capabilities related to social media for salespersons and social CRM technologies.
Finally, we also encountered some newly generated digital marketing capabilities in the
survey.4 Some of the B2B participants indicated that they miss digital marketing capabilities on
4 These newly generated digital marketing capabilities were coded by the author team from answers to the question
whether any important digital marketing capabilities or technologies were missing in the list.
21
our list that are important to them. First, several additional communication channels were
mentioned. For instance, e-mail marketing and newsletter marketing were highlighted as
important communication channels to build and nurture customer relationships. Other
participants indicated the increasing importance of instant messaging such as WhatsApp, Viber,
and Telegram for professional relationships. Nonetheless, in order to orchestrate multiple
communication channels, several participants pointed out that industrial firms need to better
understand how to take advantage of marketing automation platforms. Second, the role of search
engines and online advertisement in an industrial context has been highlighted, including topics
such as search engine optimization, search engine advertisement, open ad auctions,
programmatic advertisement, retargeting, and pay per click optimization. Third, some
participants already experiment with paid social media and in particular influencer marketing in
a B2B context, without a clear understanding whether and how these digital activities pay off.
Fourth, it was pointed out that online product configurators are important for B2C but so far
overlooked for B2B firms although they could be used for similar purposes. Finally, chatbots
offer the potential to make online conversations more efficient but are according to some
participants not yet used for professional relationships.
——— Insert Table 4, 5, and 6 here ———
5. Discussion and future research agenda
We contribute to the understanding of how digital marketing has evolved and will further
mature in industrial marketing practices by using the resource-based perspective to identify
different digital marketing capabilities, by reviewing 129 relevant articles investigating these
capabilities over the past two decades, and by confronting 169 managers with the identified
capabilities and the results of the literature review. We find seven categories of capabilities that
can be grouped in four research themes: channels, social media, digital relationships, and digital
22
technologies. In the light of several shortcomings of the current state of research that have
limited its relevance and created points of disconnect between academia and practice, we build a
future research agenda of emerging research topics related to digital capabilities in the industrial
marketing field (see Table 7). Due to the evolution of the Internet and the shrinking cost of
communication, there is a widening gap between the accelerating complexity of markets and the
capacity of most marketing organizations to comprehend and cope with this complexity (Day,
2011). This gap is evident when we compare the current development and future importance of
digital marketing capabilities within the four themes.
5.1. Channels
Similar to the current developments related to channels that is lower in B2B than B2C
(ΔB2B vs. B2C = -.31), also research in industrial marketing lags considerably behind the
omnichannel developments in B2C research. While the online channel has been studied and the
importance of multichannel strategies is recognized (e.g., Manser-Payne et al., 2017), a vast
amount of research still departs from more traditional channel structures or concentrates on either
the online channel in isolation (e.g., Gregory et al., 2019). For the online channel, optimization
through tools such as SEO remains a challenge and a better understanding of how such tools and
advertisement (still) plays a role continues to be important. While most B2B managers consider
the firm’s own website as instrumental in their marketing strategy, this is rudimentary and
multichannel capabilities are also a top priority for the future (ct. Hossain et al., 2020).
What the value of each channel is in serving business clients, how to seamlessly integrate
those channels in (existing) structures, and how to optimize conversion from one point to the
next is far from clear from extant knowledge. Inspired by the developing literature dedicated to
customer experience management in B2C (Kranzbühler et al., 2018), industrial marketers could
benefit from developing more insights in what the value-in-use of various touchpoints (Maechler
23
et al., 2017) is and what this entails for the optimization of the sales funnel. Specific topics of
attention here are the use of mobile as well as the role of third parties. Mobile had long been
integrated in the back office of many industrial firms, but the role of mobile applications in
general and mobile as a sales assistant specifically is less well studied in B2B, despite its
importance for practice (Archacki et al., 2017).
In the light of channels and touch point analysis, it is important to consider the role of
third parties in aiding and/or complimenting the customer journey. Emerging trends in service
research and B2C marketing is stressing the importance of a network approach (Zolkiewski et al.,
2017), where different parties that influence the customer in various stages of the journey should
be explicitly considered, and the discussion on owned versus earned touchpoints has yet to arise
in industrial marketing. Third party-selling, while not a top priority, is a relevant theme in B2B
and how to manage the implications of such partnership in a multichannel environment is an
undeniable part of future B2B business.
5.2. Social media
Building on the role of channels and multichannel capabilities, social media capabilities
warrant greater attention in their own right (ΔB2B vs. B2C = -.12). Overall, this was regarded as a
theme with high future importance, but also where most development needs to take place
demonstrating a significant digital marketing capabilities gap. Again, this is a field that has
developed at remarkable pace in B2C (e.g., Herhausen et al. 2019, 2020b), and is only evolving
in B2B (Bill et al., 2020). We might speculate that this is due to the fact that social media is often
seen as a haven for consumers to interact with consumers and where consumer empowerment is
considered superior to the role of the firm. Additionally, there is the traditional assumption that
B2C is a high-volume customer market and B2B tends to deal with less customers and thus
24
naturally geared towards more face-to-face interactions. That assumption however has been
overhauled by the reality of contemporary industrial markets and customer expectations.
There are several social media initiatives that focus specifically on B2B and business
opportunities (e.g., Linkedin, Google Plus, and Slideshare). However, research in this area has
devoted little attention to how interactions on such platforms can systematically fertilize (new)
business opportunities. While social media is often recognized as a lead generator (Bill et al.,
2020), some work has also pointed out the value of social media for relationship management
(Olgivie et al., 2018). Equally, others have proclaimed it as the new way of (net)working (Katona
& Sarvary, 2014). Also, it is not clear yet what the microfoundations of social media use are that
enable industrial firms to engage in successful social media conversations. Social media often
carries connotations of being “personal” and the need to be authentic, which has led to some
backlash for companies that have taken strategic direction towards their employees and their
social media interactions, with customers or otherwise (Mehmet & Clarke, 2016). Hence it
remains unclear, what the role of the firm should be in developing social media strategies, how
employees can be engaged in the right types of social media interactions, and how these translate
to employee and firm performance. Early research seems to indicate that social media had value
for industrial marketing, but how value creation and appropriation via these platforms emerges
and which contingencies play a role in this is an important avenue for further research.
Corporate blogging was recognized as an emerging opportunity. While B2C practice as
well as research on blogging, vlogging and influencer marketing has steadily developed into a
mature field (e.g., Hughes et al., 2019), B2B marketers struggle with how to develop corporate
blogging into a strategically relevant tool. As it is difficult to draw upon analogies from the B2C
world, where just about any consumer can become a b/vlogger, research in this field can make a
25
making process (Rosario substantial contribution in exploring the mechanisms of how corporate blogging can become an
influential communication strategy in industrial marketing.
Specifically in relation to social media, the question arises how industrial firms can
capitalize on the “voice of the customer”. From the start, social media has developed a strong
stand in the reviewing sphere. In B2C, consumers consider social media as an important source
of information and reviews, both positive and negative, are highly influential in the decision-
et al., 2016). Industrial marketers have yet to appreciate and embrace
how this dimension of social media can be used effectively in B2B. Given that the decision
making process in B2B is often substantially different from that of the individual consumer, it is
important to understand which factors would drive the impact of such review platforms in
industrial marketing and to what extent firms can strategically influence these factors in order to
capitalize on the review phenomenon in social media. Recent compelling insights by Bill et al.
(2020) have found no fundamental support for the B2B salesperson social media use-customer
loyalty relationship which challenges social media’s role as a ‘game-changer’ (Kumar, 2015) and
a ‘revolution in sales’ (Marshall et al., 2012). However, there are important contingencies to this
relationship Bill et al (2020) identify, whereby customer status and the size of the buying center
exhibit significant positive relationship in enhancing loyalty. Consequently, social media
adoption is not a panacea. Rather we need to examine the adoption practices and behaviors that
trigger intermediate customer outcomes such as loyalty, lifetime value, and brand equity while
recognizing that several contingencies potentially magnify these differential effects.
5.3. Digital relationships
Given the developments in the previous two themes, the theme of both inter- and intra-
firm digital relationships emerges naturally as a point of interest. Relationship marketing has
strong roots in industrial marketing (as indicated by ΔB2B vs. B2C = .05). However, personal
26
relationships are often equated with face-to-face interactions in B2B. Such a narrow
understanding neglects that employees may also play a pivotal role of in digital interactions. For
example, Herhausen et al. (2020a) provide evidence of the positive effects of employees’ digital
presence on customer loyalty, and Singh et al. (2020) shed light on salespersons’ influence
tactics in digital negotiations. Moreover, there is the belief that the salesperson’s tacit knowledge
is pivotal to successful relationship management. In fact, attempts to transform to (digital)
technologies to capture such tacit knowledge and manage relationships using a more data-driven
approach often meets resistance from employees as they feel threatened by such transformational
changes. Moving forward however, digital relationships are important in developing and
sustaining a successful business, especially for those firms operating on an international or even
global level. In fact, as the scope of the firm increases, personal and customized interactions and
solutions can be achieved in many different ways (e.g., online product configurators), especially
when digital CRM capabilities are developed in the right way. Online product configurators
allow organizational buyers to select from product variants and construct a customized product
solution manner. Building these capabilities at scale enables firms to provide mass customization
to products that are high complex. An example of this is Zeppelin’s configurator that provides
B2B customers of Caterpillar construction machinery the platform upon which to design
configure to specific performance requirements.
Cloud computing infrastructure provides B2B operatives on-demand network access to a
pool of configurable resources. Commonly considered the responsibility of the Chief Digital
Officer, decision rights over these and other new digital capabilities are becoming increasingly
blurred. Whilst digital transformations is becoming seamless and core, important questions over
the decison rights remain—who owns what, which processes, and what rules apply to understand
the evolution of digital transformation. For example, Péladeau and Acker (2019) assert that:
27
“Previously, Chief Digital Officer roles tended to be filled by people from market-facing
functions, including marketing, customer services, sales, or distribution. Now, however,
organizations are increasingly seeking Chief Digital Officer s with strategy and technology
backgrounds—those who are able to work at the C-level across functional silos and who are
capable of understanding the disruptions enabled by technology”.
The same applies to better understanding how different digital marketing capabilities
across the B2B firm’s portfolio, both complement and/or substitute across these ‘new’ internal
boundaries, interfaces, and interdependencies of the marketing organization with other functional
areas in industrial firms. This question can be taken further by asking for which relational tasks
can digital marketing capabilities be developed in industrial firms so as to reduce the reliance on
personal interaction? Yadav and Pavlou (2020) pose a similar question for B2C contexts in order
to better understand how relationships can alter within technology-enabled interactions. In setting
management interventions then to develop such capabilities in B2B firms, it is important to
understand clearly what are the sources of resistance to developing these at the individual
employee level?
5.4. Digital technologies
Underlying all themes is the development of digital technologies as an essential resource
feeding into digital capabilities, which is more in B2C settings (ΔB2B vs. B2C = -.30). To fuel
marketing automation (e.g., website and search optimization, CRM), it is important to understand
how integrating intelligent sales technologies into the sales channel can nurture relationships and
create a substantial advantage for industrial firms. The qualities of those technologies
substantially impact customer satisfaction and loyalty (Kingshott et al., 2020), hence it is
important to understand both the characteristics of the technology that will make it successful as
well as those that will drive employees’ optimal use of it. Even though not fully accepted yet,
28
there are signs that the need for personal contact is changing also in B2B (i.e., more willingness
to do business via digital technology; Tan & Ludwig, 2016). Future research might transfer the
high-tech vs. high-touch debate from the service context to an industrial context (Wirtz &
Zeithaml, 2018). Interestingly, while technology interfaces have typically been regarded as less
personal and less rich, arising technologies such as VR might actually shift this discussion to a
more experiential focus, also in industrial marketing as these technologies are offering vivid and
multi-sensory experiences (Boyd & Koles, 2019).
What is important to pay attention to in this digital transformation is the role of the
employee and the negative consequences that such networks tend to be “always on” (i.e., 24/7
availability; Marshall et al., 2012). Especially in competitive environments, employees’
wellbeing might be at serious risk here, especially when at the same time digital transformation
can be perceived as a threat to the employees’ job (i.e., being replaced by technology). More and
more attention is being devoted to this issue, especially in light of the upcoming IoT and AI
technologies and their potential to transform business models altogether (Huang & Rust, 2018).
Along with these technology developments, it is important to understand the interplay of
management skills such as innovation skills, leadership skills, management skills (Sousa &
Rocha, 2019) to successfully translate these developments internally and externally.
Given the complexity of industrial markets, the potential of AI and IoT might be even
larger than for B2C. Such technologies can deal with far more complex problems than humans
can, so the potential to shift boundaries and create new paradigms is substantial. However, this
also implies that there are new risks to account for, “as loci of control are likely to shift” (Sousa
& Rocha, 2019), not just to customers but also to systems and technologies itself, as they start to
interact independently. Consequently, future research directions emerge that call for specific
industrial context.
29
5.5. Limitations
Our literature review is necessarily ‘retrospective’, restricted to existing research topics,
and subject to the limitations inherent in the original studies. Only few of the articles deal with
performance outcomes of digital marketing capabilities. For instance, many studies investigated
the relationship between digital marketing capabilities and related constructs from a nomological
network (e.g., social media use influences better collection of market intelligence online) but we
know very little whether these digital marketing capabilities provide a positive return to
investment (because building these capabilities can be costly) or whether they increase sales or
another financial outcome. In addition, most articles do not consider contingency effects in the
outcomes of digital marketing capabilities. Whereas “mainstream” capability research is already
saturated with a contingency approach (Morgan et al., 2019), we hardly found any papers on
digital capabilities in an industrial marketing context. Such important nuances should be
addressed by future research. Our subsequent interviews and the survey were designed to gain
insight into the current development and future importance of digital marketing capabilities
among practitioners, none of which allows us to measure actual usage or outcomes. More fine-
grained empirical studies could determine the relative performance effects of different digital
marketing capabilities for industrial firms, and a larger sample could examine industry-specific
differences in the importance of the digital marketing capabilities.
6. Conclusion
Taken together, the literature review, the management interviews, and the survey revealed
two marketing capabilities gaps: the practice gap—which identifies the deficit between
managers’ ‘current’ practices and their ‘ideal’ digital marketing capabilities; and, the knowledge
gap—which demonstrates a significant divide between the digital marketing transformations in
industrial firms and the extant scholarly knowledge that underpins this. We strongly believe that
30
the current COVID-19 crisis further increases the opportunities and importance of digital
marketing capabilities for B2B firms (e.g., Pedersen, Ritter, & Di Benedetto, 2020). Many
governments implemented social distancing at large scales to limit spreading of the virus, and
digital sales channels took priority during the COVID-19 crisis. Given that by the time we write
this article there is no sign that personal meetings will be the norm again, B2B firms and B2B
scholars need to close the digital marketing capabilities gap as fast as possible. We hope that our
research agenda provide guidance for this endeavor.
31
REFERENCES
Agnihotri, R., Kothandaraman, P., Kashyap, R., & Singh, R. (2012). Bringing “social” into sales:
The impact of salespeople’s social media use on service behaviors and value creation.
Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32(3), 333-348.
Agnihotri, R., Trainor, K. J., Itani, O. S., & Rodriguez, M. (2017). Examining the role of sales-
based CRM technology and social media use on post-sale service behaviors in India.
Journal of Business Research, 81, 144-154.
American Marketing Association (2013). Definitions of Marketing. https://www.ama.org/the-
definition-of-marketing/
Andzulis, J. M., Panagopoulos, N. G., & Rapp, A. (2012). A review of social media and
implications for the sales process. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32(3),
305-316.
Archacki, R., Protextor, K., Barrios, G., & de Bellefonds, N. (2017), Mobile Marketing and the
New B2B Buyer. Boston Consulting Group Report. https://www.bcg.com/en-
gb/publications/2017/marketing-sales-digital-go-to-market-transformation-mobile-
marketing-new-b2b-buyer.aspx
Avlonitis, G. J., & Karayanni, D. A. (2000). The impact of internet use on business-to-business
marketing: Examples from American and European companies. Industrial Marketing
Management, 29(5), 441-459.
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management,
17(1), 99-120.
Berthon, P., Pitt, L., Berthon, J. P., Campbell, C., & Thwaites, D. (2008). E-relationships for e-
readiness: Culture and corruption in international e-B2B. Industrial Marketing
Management, 37(1), 83-91.
Bharadwaj, A., El Sawy, O. A., Pavlou, P. A., & Venkatraman, N. (2013). Digital business
strategy: Toward a next generation of insights. MIS Quarterly, 37(2), 471-482.
Bill, F., Feurer, S., & Klarmann, M. J. (2020), Salesperson social media use in business-to-
business relationships: An empirical test of an integrative framework linking antecedents
and consequences. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, in press.
Boyd, D. E., & Koles, B. (2019). Virtual reality and its impact on B2B marketing: A value-in-use
perspective. Journal of Business Research, 100, 590-598.
Bruhn, M., Schnebelen, S., & Schäfer, D. (2014). Antecedents and consequences of the quality of
e-customer-to-customer interactions in B2B brand communities. Industrial Marketing
Management, 43(1), 164-176.
Chakraborty, G., Lala, V., & Warren, D. (2002). An empirical investigation of antecedents of
B2B Websites’ effectiveness. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 16(4), 51-72.
Chirumalla, K., Oghazi, P., & Parida, V. (2018). Social media engagement strategy: Investigation
of marketing and R&D interfaces in manufacturing industry. Industrial Marketing
Management, 74(5), 138-149.
32
Clarke III, I., & Flaherty, T. B. (2003). Web-based B2B portals. Industrial Marketing
Management, 32(1), 15-23.
Day, G. S. (2011). Closing the marketing capabilities gap. Journal of Marketing, 75(4), 183-195.
Eng, T. Y. (2004). The role of e-marketplaces in supply chain management. Industrial Marketing
Management, 33(2), 97-105.
Garcia-Dastugue, S. J., & Lambert, D. M. (2003). Internet-enabled coordination in the supply
chain. Industrial Marketing Management, 32(3), 251-263.
Gill, M., Sridhar, S., & Grewal, R. (2017). Return on engagement initiatives: A study of a
business-to-business mobile app. Journal of Marketing, 81(4), 45-66.
Gordini, N., & Veglio, V. (2017). Customers churn prediction and marketing retention strategies.
An application of support vector machines based on the AUC parameter-selection
technique in B2B e-commerce industry. Industrial Marketing Management, 62(3), 100-
107.
Gregory, G. D., Ngo, L. V. & Karavdic, M. (2019), Developing e-commerce marketing
capabilities and efficiencies for enhanced performance in business-to-business export
ventures. Industrial Marketing Management, 78 (3), 146-157.
Grewal, R., Chakravarty, A. & Saini, A. (2010). Governance mechanisms in business-to-business
electronic markets. Journal of Marketing, 74(July), 45-62.
Grewal, R., Comer, J. M., & Mehta, R. (2001). An investigation into the antecedents of
organizational participation in business-to-business electronic markets. Journal of
Marketing, 65(3), 17-33.
Guesalaga, R. (2016). The use of social media in sales: Individual and organizational
antecedents, and the role of customer engagement in social media. Industrial Marketing
Management, 54(3), 71-79.
Guesalaga, R., Gabrielsson, M., Rogers, B., Ryals, L., & Cuevas, J. M. (2018). Which resources
and capabilities underpin strategic key account management? Industrial Marketing
Management, 75(4), 160-172.
Gupta, A. (2018). 7 Not-To-Miss Digital Marketing Trends for B2B.
https://thenextscoop.com/digital-marketing-trends-b2b/
Gupta, S., Cadeaux, J. & Dubelaar, C. (2006). Uncovering multiple champion roles in
implementing new-technology ventures. Journal of Business Research, 59(5), 549-563.
Gupta, S., Cadeaux, J. & Woodside, A. (2005). Mapping network champion behavior in B2B
electronic venturing? Industrial Marketing Management, 34(5), 495-503.
Hardwick, J., & Anderson, A. R. (2019). Supplier-customer engagement for collaborative
innovation using video conferencing: A study of SMEs. Industrial Marketing Management.
80, 43-57.
Herhausen, D., Emrich, O., Grewal, D., Kipfelsberger, P., & Schoegel, M. (2020a): Face
forward: How employees’ digital presence on service websites affects customer
perceptions of website and employee service quality. Journal of Marketing Research,
forthcoming.
33
Herhausen, D., Ludwig, S., Grewal, D., Wulf, J., & Schoegel, M. (2019). Detecting, preventing,
and mitigating online firestorms in brand communities. Journal of Marketing, 83(3), 1-21.
Herhausen, D., Ludwig, S., Grewal, D., Wulf, J., & Schoegel, M. (2020b): How to Keep
Complaints from Spreading. Harvard Business Review, 99(3), 19-23.
Hossain, T. M. T., Akter, S., Kattiyapornpong, U. & Dwivedi, Y. (2020), Reconceptualizing
Integration Quality Dynamics for Omnichannel Marketing. Industrial Marketing
Management, 87(4), 225-241.
Hughes, C., Swaminathan, V., & Brooks, G. (2019), Driving brand engagement through online
social influencers: an empirical investigation of sponsored blogging campaigns. Journal of
Marketing, 83(5), 78-96.
Iankova, S., Davies, I., Archer-Brown, C., Marder, B., & Yau, A. (2019). A comparison of social
media marketing between B2B, B2C, and mixed business models. Industrial Marketing
Management, 81(4), 169-179.
Itani, O. S., Agnihotri, R., & Dingus, R. (2017). Social media use in B2B sales and its impact on
competitive intelligence collection and adaptive selling: Examining the role of learning
orientation as an enabler. Industrial Marketing Management, 66(3), 64-79.
Janda, J. (2018). 2018 Industrial Marketing Trends and Challenges.
https://www.weidert.com/whole_brain_marketing_blog/industrial-marketing-trends-and-
challenges.
Kabadayi, S., Eyuboglu, N., & Thomas, G. P. (2007). The performance implications of designing
multiple channels to fit with strategy and environment. Journal of Marketing, 71(4), 195-
211.
Kannan, P. K., Hongshuang “Alice” L. (2017). Digital marketing: A framework, review, and
research agenda. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 34(1), 22-45.
Kaplan, A. M., & Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges and
opportunities of social media. Business Horizons, 53(1), 59-68.
Keramati, A., Mehrabi, H., & Mojir, N. (2010). A process-oriented perspective on customer
relationship management and organizational performance: An empirical investigation.
Industrial Marketing Management, 39(7), 1170-1185.
Kingshott, R. P., Sharma, P., & Nair, S. R. (2020). Social and technical chains-of-effects in
business-to-business (B2B) service relationships. European Journal of Marketing, 54(6),
1225-1246.
Kranzbühler, A. M., Kleijnen, M. H., Morgan, R. E., & Teerling, M. (2018). The multilevel
nature of customer experience research: an integrative review and research agenda.
International Journal of Management Reviews, 20(2), 433-456.
Kumar, V. (2015). Evolution of marketing as a discipline: What has happened and what to look
out for. Journal of Marketing, 79(1), 1–9.
Kumar, V., & Reinartz, W. (2016). Creating enduring customer value. Journal of Marketing,
80(6), 36-68.
34
La Rocca A., Perna A., Caruana A., & Snehota I. (2016). Developing new business
relationships: an outside-in perspective. In Campbell C., Ma J. (eds) Looking Forward,
Looking Back: Drawing on the Past to Shape the Future of Marketing. Developments in
Marketing Science: Proceedings of the Academy of Marketing Science. Springer, New
York, NY.
Laczko, P., Hullova. D., Needham, A., Rossiter, A-M., Battisti, M. (2019). The role of a central
actor in increasing platform stickiness and stakeholder profitability: Bridging the gap
between value creation and value capture in the sharing economy. Industrial Marketing
Management, 76(1), 214-230.
Lamberton, C., & Stephen, A. T. (2016). A thematic exploration of digital, social media, and
mobile marketing: Research evolution from 2000 to 2015 and an agenda for future inquiry.
Journal of Marketing, 80(6), 146-172.
Lambrecht, A., & Tucker, C. E. (2015). Can big data protect a firm from competition? Available
at SSRN 2705530. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2705530
Lassk, F. G., Ingram, T. N., Kraus, F., & Mascio, R. D. (2012). The future of sales training:
Challenges and related research questions. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales
Management, 32(1), 141-154.
Leek, S., Canning, L., & Houghton, D. (2016). Revisiting the Task Media Fit Model in the era of
Web 2.0: Twitter use and interaction in the healthcare sector. Industrial Marketing
Management, 54(2), 25-32.
Leminen, S., Rajahonka, M., Wendelin, R., & Westerlund, M. (2019). Industrial internet of
things business models in the machine-to-machine context. Industrial Marketing
Management, 84, 298-311.
Li, C., Guo, S., Cao, L., & Li, J. (2018). Digital enablement and its role in internal branding: A
case study of Huanyi travel agency. Industrial Marketing Management, 72(1), 152-160.
Long, M. M., Tellefsen, T., & Lichtenthal, J. D. (2007). Internet integration into the industrial
selling process: A step-by-step approach. Industrial Marketing Management, 36(5), 676-
689.
López-Fernández, B. & Perrigot, R. (2018). Using websites to recruit franchisee candidates.
Journal of Interactive Marketing, 42(May), 80-94.
MacDonald, J. B., & Smith, K. (2004). The effects of technology-mediated communication on
industrial buyer behaviour. Industrial Marketing Management, 33(2), 107-116.
Maechler, N., Poenaru, A., von Collenberg, T. R. & Schulze, P. (2017), Finding the right digital
balance in B2B customer experience. McKinsey & Company Report.
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/marketing-and-sales/our-insights/finding-
the-right-digital-balance-in-b2b-customer-experience
Mallapragada, G., Grewal. R., Mehta. R., Dharwadkar, R. (2015). Virtual interorganizational
relationships in business-to-business electronic markets: heterogeneity in the effects of
organizational interdependence on relational outcomes. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 43(5), 610-628.
35
Manser-Payne, E., Peltier, J. & Barger, V. (2017), Omni-channel marketing, integrated
marketing communications and consumer engagement: A research agenda. Journal of
Research in Interactive Marketing, 11(2), 185-197.
Marshall, G. W., Moncrief, W. C., Rudd, J. M., & Lee, N. (2012). Revolution in sales: The
impact of social media and related technology on the selling environment. Journal of
Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32(3), 349-363.
Mehmet, M. I., & Clarke, R. J. (2016). B2B social media semantics: Analyzing multimodal
online meanings in marketing conversations. Industrial Marketing Management, 54(4), 92-
106.
Michaelidou, N., Siamagka, N. T., & Christodoulides, G. (2011). Usage, barriers, and
measurement of social media marketing: An exploratory investigation of small and
medium B2B brands. Industrial Marketing Management, 40(7), 1153-1159.
Morgan, R. E., Miočević, D., & Herhausen, D. (2019). Capability-driven industrial firms:
Considering resources, capabilities, and competencies for marketing developments.
Industrial Marketing Management, 83(Nov), 1-7.
Müller, J. M., Pommeranz, B., Weisser, J., & Voigt, K. I. (2018). Digital, Social Media, and
Mobile Marketing in industrial buying: Still in need of customer segmentation? Empirical
evidence from Poland and Germany. Industrial Marketing Management, 73(1), 70-83.
Murphy, M. & Sashi, C. M. (2018). Communication, interactivity, and satisfaction in B2B
relationships. Industrial Marketing Management, 68(1), 1-12.
Ng, I. C., & Wakenshaw, S. Y. (2017). The internet-of-things: Review and research directions.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 34(1), 3-21.
Nguyen, B., Yu, X., Melewar, T. C., & Chen, J. (2015). Brand innovation and social media:
Knowledge acquisition from social media, market orientation, and the moderating role of
social media strategic capability. Industrial Marketing Management, 51(8), 11-25.
O’Neill, M. (2018). 11 Exciting B2B Marketing Trends You Need to Know in 2019.
https://www.brafton.com/blog/strategy/11-exciting-b2b-marketing-trends-you-need-to-
know-for-2018/
Ogilvie, J., Agnihotri, R., Rapp, A., & Trainor, K. (2018). Social media technology use and
salesperson performance: A two study examination of the role of salesperson behaviors,
characteristics, and training. Industrial Marketing Management, 75(6), 55-65.
Osmonbekov, T., Bello, D. C., & Gilliland, D. I. (2009). The impact of e-business infusion on
channel coordination, conflict, and reseller performance. Industrial Marketing
Management, 38(7), 778-784.
Pagani, M., & Pardo, C. (2017). The impact of digital technology on relationships in a business
network. Industrial Marketing Management, 67(9), 185-192.
Pedersen, C. L., Ritter, T., & Di Benedetto, C. A. (2020). Managing through a crisis: Managerial
implications for business-to-business firms. Industrial Marketing Management, 88, 314-
322.
36
Péladeau, P. & Acker, A. (2019). Have we reached “peak” chief digital officer?
Strategy+Business, March 26. PwC, London. https://www.strategy-
business.com/blog/have-we-reached-peak-chief-digital-officer
Quinton, S., & Wilson, D. (2016). Tensions and ties in social media networks: Towards a model
of understanding business relationship development and business performance
enhancement through the use of LinkedIn. Industrial Marketing Management, 54(2), 15-
24.
Rapp, A., Beitelspacher, L. S., Grewal, D., & Hughes, D. E. (2013). Understanding social media
effects across seller, retailer, and consumer interactions. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 41(5), 547–566.
Rodriguez, M., Peterson, R. M., & Krishnan, V. (2012). Social media’s influence on business-to-
business sales performance. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32(3), 365-
378.
Rosario, A. B., Sotgiu, F., de Valck, K., & Bijmolt, T. H. A. (2016). The effect of electronic
word of mouth on sales: A meta-analytic review of platform, product, and metric factors.
Journal of Marketing Research, 53(3), 297-318.
Salo, J. (2017). Social media research in the industrial marketing field: Review of literature and
future research directions. Industrial Marketing Management, 66, 115-129.
Sarin, S., Sego, T., Kohli, A. K., & Challagalla, G. (2010). Characteristics that enhance training
effectiveness in implementing technological change in sales strategy: A field-based
exploratory study. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 30(2), 143-156.
Shaltoni, A. M. & West, D. C. (2010). The measurement of e-marketing orientation (EMO) in
business-to-business markets. Industrial Marketing Management, 39(7), 1097-1102.
Siamagka, N. T., Christodoulides, G., Michaelidou, N., & Valvi, A. (2015). Determinants of
social media adoption by B2B organizations. Industrial Marketing Management, 51(6), 89-
99.
Singh, S. K., Marinova, D., & Singh, J. (2020). Business-to-Business E-Negotiations and
Influence Tactics. Journal of Marketing, 84(2), 47-68.
Spreer, P., & Rauschnabel, P. A. (2016). Selling with technology: Understanding the resistance
to mobile sales assistant use in retailing. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management,
36(3), 240-263.
Steward, M. D., Narus, J. A., & Roehm, M. L. (2018). An exploratory study of business-to-
business online customer reviews: External online professional communities and internal
vendor scorecards. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 46(2), 173-189.
Steward, M. D., Narus, J. A., & Roehm, M. L. (2018). An exploratory study of business-to-
business online customer reviews: External online professional communities and internal
vendor scorecards. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 46(2), 173-189.
Suppatvech, C., Godsell, J., & Day, S. (2019). The roles of internet of things technology in
enabling servitized business models: A systematic literature review. Industrial Marketing
Management. 82(7), 70-86.
37
Swani, K., Brown, B. P., & Milne, G. R. (2014). Should tweets differ for B2B and B2C? An
analysis of Fortune 500 companies' Twitter communications. Industrial Marketing
Management, 43(5), 873-881.
Tan, J., & Ludwig, S. (2016). Regional adoption of business-to-business electronic commerce in
China: Role of E-readiness. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 20(3), 408-439.
Thaichon, P., Surachartkumtonkun, J., Quach, S., Weaven, S., & Palmatier, R. W. (2018). Hybrid
sales structures in the age of e-commerce. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales
Management, 38(3), 277-302.
Trainor, K. J. (2012). Relating social media technologies to performance: A capabilities-based
perspective. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32(3), 317-331.
Wang, W. Y., Pauleen, D. J., & Zhang, T. (2016). How social media applications affect B2B
communication and improve business performance in SMEs. Industrial Marketing
Management, 54(2), 4-14.
Wang, Y., Hsiao, S. H., Yang, Z., & Hajli, N. (2016). The impact of sellers’ social influence on
the co-creation of innovation with customers and brand awareness in online communities.
Industrial Marketing Management, 54(3), 56-70.
Wang, Y., Potter, A., Naim, M. & Beevo, D. (2011). A case study exploring drivers and
implications of collaborative electronic logistics marketplaces. Industrial Marketing
Management, 40(4), 612-623.
Wirtz, J., & Zeithaml, V. (2018). Cost-effective service excellence. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 46(1), 59-80.
Yadav, M. S., & Pavlou, P.A. (2020). Technology-enabled interactions in digital environments:
A conceptual foundation for current and future research. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 48(1), 132–136.
Yadav, M. S., and Pavlou, P. A. (2014). Marketing in computer-mediated environments:
Research synthesis and new directions. Journal of Marketing, 78(1), 20-40.
Zahay, D., Hajli, N. & Sihi, D. (2018). Managerial perspectives on crowdsourcing in the new
product development process. Industrial Marketing Management, 71(4), 41-53.
Zolkiewski, J., Story, V., Burton, J., Chan, P., Gomes, A., Hunter-Jones, P., O’Malley, L., Peters,
L., Raddats, C., & Robinson, W. (2017), Strategic B2B customer experience management:
The importance of outcomes-based measures. Journal of Services Marketing, 31(2), 172-
184.
38
Table 1: Literature review on digital marketing capabilities for industrial firms
Themes Topics Illustrative Capabilities Illustrative Resources
Theme 1:
Channels
Online Channel
(49 appearances)
Multichannel
(13 appearances)
Mobile
(3 appearances)
Internet use (Avlonitis and Karayanni 2000)
Participation in electronic markets
(Grewal et al. 2001)
Website (Chakraborty et al. 2002)
Web-based portal (Clarke III and Flaherty 2003)
E-marketplace (Eng 2004)
E-readiness (Berthon et al. 2008)
Channel integration (Long et al. 2007)
Hybrid sales structure (Thaichon et al. 2018)
Channel coordination (Osmonbekov et al. 2009)
Multi-channel capability (Kabadayi et al. 2007)
Mobile device usage (Müller et al. 2018) Mobile sales assistants
(Spreer and Rauschnabel 2016)
Mobile app (Gill et al. 2017)
Theme 2:
Social Media
Social Media
(34 appearances)
Social media use (Agnihotri et al. 2012)
Social media messaging (Swani et al. 2014)
Social media knowledge (Nguyen et al. 2015)
Social CRM technologies (Trainor 2012)
Social media community (Wang et al. 2016)
Positive customer reviews (Steward et al. 2018)
Theme 3:
Digital
Relationships
Interfirm
Relationships
(23 appearances)
Employees
(4 appearances)
Digital supply chain coordination
(Garcıa-Dastugue and Lambert 2003)
CRM process capabilities (Keramati et al. 2010)
Video conferencing usage
(Hardwick and Anderson 2019)
Implementing technological change
(Sarin et al. 2010)
Technology capability (Lassk et al. 2012)
Salesperson social media competency
(Guesalaga 2016)
Digital CRM (Keramati et al. 2010)
CRM technology (Agnihotri et al. 2017)
Digitalization for internal branding (Li et al. 2018)
Theme 4:
Digital
Technologies
Technologies
(18 appearances)
IT capability (Grewal et al. 2001)
Artificial intelligence and machine learning
(Gordini and Veglio 2017)
Virtual reality usage (Boyd and Koles 2019)
Digital selling tools (Marshall et al. 2012)
Internet of things technology
(Suppatvech et al. 2019)
Machine-to-machine communication
(Leminen et al. 2019)
39
Table 2: Digital marketing capability second-order themes and first-order topics over time
Research Topics and
Derived Themes
2000 to 2004:
The Rise of the
Online Channel
2005 to 2009:
The Multichannel
Challenge
2010 to 2014:
Deepening Digital
Relationships
2015 to 2019:
Mobile, Social Media,
and New Technologies
Channels 33 (85%) 17 (90%) 3 (11%) 12 (19%)
Online Channel 30 (77%) 10 (53%) 3 (11%) 6 (9%)
Multichannel 3 (8%) 7 (37%) – 3 (5%)
Mobile – – – 3 (5%)
Social Media – – 8 (31%) 26 (42%)
Digital Relationships 5 (13%) 2 (10%) 10 (39%) 11 (17%)
Interfirm Relationships 5 (13%) 2 (10%) 8 (31%) 9 (14%)
Employees – – 2 (8%) 2 (3%)
Digital Technologies 1 (2%) – 5 (19%) 14 (22%)
Total Publications 39 19 26 63
40
Table 3: Profile analysis of participants in the management survey
Full Sample B2B Respondents B2C Respondents
Country
Switzerland 67 48% 25%
Germany 15 10% 6%
Austria 12 4% 7%
Croatia 10 3% 4%
United Kingdom 8 10% 8%
Other 57 25% 54%
Industry
IT and Technology 23 19% 5%
Fast-Moving Consumer Goods 19 9% 16%
Retailing 13 5% 13%
Optics, Medicine, and Measurement 11 8% 5%
Financial Services 10 6% 6%
Manufacturing 10 9% 2%
Service Provider 10 9% 2%
Other 73 35% 51%
Position
General Management 67 48% 25%
Marketing 64 27% 49%
Sales 27 20% 10%
Product Development 6 5% 2%
Other 5 0% 14%
Yearly Turnover
up to 1 million Euro 31 20% 16%
1 million to 5 million Euro 13 9% 6%
5 million to 20 million Euro 15 11% 5%
20 million to 50 million Euro 12 9% 3%
50 million to 100 Euro 19 14% 6%
more than 100 million Euro 63 37% 38%
No response 16 0% 25%
Organizational Size (Employees) 9,736 10,802 7,312
Organizational Age 59.69 56.80 66.62
Tenure in Years 8.70 9.19 7.57
Age in Years 43.48 43.69 43.00
Gender (Female) 26% 28% 22%
Note: NB2B = 106 managers, NB2C = 63 managers.
41
Table 4: Most important digital marketing capabilities
Most Important Capabilities for B2B Firms Most Important Capabilities for B2C Firms
1. Own company website 75% 1. Own company website 56%
2. Multichannel capability 48% 2. Multichannel capability 48%
3. Social CRM technologies 4. Social media for organizational communication 45% 3. Social media for organizational communication 30%
43% Providing a mobile app for customers 30%
5. Digital selling tools 31% 4. Social CRM technologies 6. Digital CRM technologies 30% 5. Implementing digital change Taking advantage of positive customer reviews 30% 6. Digital CRM technologies 24%
22%
21%
7. Implementing digital change 26% Reacting appropriately on negative customer reviews 21%
Engaging in digital business communities 26% Use of third party e-commerce for selling 21%
8. Reacting appropriately on negative customer reviews 25% Digital selling tools 21%
Use of third party e-commerce for selling 25% 7. Own social media community 9. Advanced data analytics 25% Advanced data analytics 19%
10. Providing a mobile app for customers 23% 8. Taking advantage of positive customer reviews 19%
17%
Salesperson social media competency 23% Use of company-sponsored blogs as communication channel 17%
9. Use of mobile sales assistants 14%
Big data visualization 14%
10. Salesperson social media competency 13%
Note: NB2B = 106 managers, NB2C = 63 managers. All participants could select as many digital marketing capabilities that are most important to them as they want (participants
selected 1 to 19 digital marketing capabilities).
42
Table 5: Current development and future importance of digital marketing capabilities
Current
Development
Future
Importance
Capabilities
Gap
B2B B2C Diff. B2B B2C Diff. ΔB2B ΔB2C ΔDIFF
Channels
Own company website 5.55 5.39 0.16 6.26 5.83 0.43 0.71 0.44 0.27
Use of third party e-commerce for purchasing 3.10 3.58 -0.48 3.74 3.94 -0.20 0.64 0.36 0.28
Use of third party e-commerce for selling 3.27 3.68 -0.41 4.43 5.02 -0.59 1.16 1.34 -0.18
Use of two-sided platforms for purchasing 2.01 2.12 -0.11 2.66 2.90 -0.24 0.65 0.78 -0.13
Use of two-sided platforms for selling 1.98 2.10 -0.12 3.05 3.59 -0.54 1.07 1.49 -0.42
Use of company-sponsored blogs 3.40 3.89 -0.49 4.72 4.75 -0.03 1.32 0.86 0.46
Multichannel capability 3.48 3.42 0.06 5.33 5.31 0.02 1.85 1.89 -0.04
Use of mobile sales assistants 2.62 2.87 -0.24 4.41 4.87 -0.46 1.79 2.00 -0.21
Providing a mobile app for customers 2.87 4.00 -1.13 4.75 5.24 -0.49 1.88 1.24 0.64
Social Media
Social media for organizational communication 4.81 5.00 -0.19 5.29 5.16 0.13 0.48 0.16 0.32
Social media for salespersons 3.40 2.95 0.45 4.94 4.57 0.37 1.54 1.62 -0.08
Social CRM technologies 3.95 3.57 0.38 5.37 5.31 0.06 1.42 1.74 -0.32
Own social media community 3.31 3.54 -0.23 4.77 4.80 -0.03 1.46 1.26 0.20
Reacting appropriately on negative customer reviews 4.16 4.89 -0.73 5.90 6.10 -0.20 1.74 1.21 0.53
Taking advantage of positive customer reviews 3.78 4.19 -0.41 5.93 5.73 0.20 2.15 1.54 0.61
Digital Relationships
Digital supply chain coordination 3.15 3.20 -0.05 4.56 4.55 0.01 1.41 1.35 0.06
Digital CRM technologies 4.16 4.07 0.10 5.39 5.45 -0.06 1.23 1.38 -0.15
Engaging in digital business communities 3.50 3.30 0.20 4.92 4.34 0.58 1.42 1.04 0.38
Video conferencing usage 4.63 4.51 0.13 5.52 4.36 1.16 0.89 -0.15 1.04
Implementing digital change 4.30 4.37 -0.07 5.98 5.84 0.14 1.68 1.47 0.21
Salesperson social media competency 3.36 3.39 -0.04 5.13 4.66 0.47 1.77 1.27 0.50
Digital Technologies
Advanced data analytics 3.36 3.67 -0.31 5.17 5.33 -0.16 1.81 1.66 0.15
Artificial intelligence and machine learning 2.52 2.71 -0.19 4.61 4.49 0.12 2.09 1.78 0.31
Big data infrastructure for structured data 3.17 3.48 -0.30 4.92 5.18 -0.26 1.75 1.70 0.05
Big data infrastructure for unstructured data 2.32 2.44 -0.11 4.41 4.57 -0.16 2.09 2.13 -0.04
Big data infrastructure for machine generated data 2.10 2.66 -0.57 4.29 4.54 -0.25 2.19 1.88 0.31
Big data visualization 2.63 3.00 -0.37 4.60 4.87 -0.27 1.97 1.87 0.10
Block chain technology 1.90 1.84 0.05 3.36 3.35 0.01 1.46 1.51 -0.05
Cloud computing 3.42 3.83 -0.41 5.18 5.08 0.10 1.76 1.25 0.51
Digital selling tools 3.50 4.13 -0.62 5.37 5.35 0.02 1.87 1.22 0.65
Internet of things technology 2.40 2.56 -0.16 4.42 4.16 0.26 2.02 1.60 0.42
Machine-to-machine communication 2.48 2.55 -0.07 4.22 3.94 0.28 1.74 1.39 0.35
Monitoring of social media data 3.47 3.97 -0.50 5.10 5.37 -0.27 1.63 1.40 0.23
Scraping and web crawling 2.28 2.90 -0.62 3.84 4.60 -0.76 1.56 1.70 -0.14
Virtual reality tools 2.13 2.45 -0.32 3.91 4.00 -0.09 1.78 1.55 0.23
Voice interfaces 2.44 2.40 0.04 4.09 4.02 0.07 1.65 1.62 0.03
Overall 3.19 3.41 -0.22 4.74 4.75 -0.01 1.55 1.34 0.21
Note: NB2B = 106 managers, NB2C = 63 managers. Current development and future importance are measured on 7-point scales.
For means and Δ, the Top 10 are in bold and the Bottom 10 are in italics. Differences between B2B and B2C above 0.5 are
highlighted.
43
Table 6: The digital marketing capabilities gap
Capabilities Gap for B2B Firms Δ Capabilities Gap for B2C Firms Δ
1. Big data infrastructure for machine generated data (DT) 2.19 1. Big data infrastructure for unstructured data 2.13
2. Taking advantage of positive customer reviews 2.15 2. Use of mobile sales assistants 2.00
3. Artificial intelligence and machine learning (DT) 2.09 3. Multichannel capability 4. Big data infrastructure for unstructured data (DT) 2.08 4. Big data infrastructure for machine generated data 1.89
1.88
5. Internet of things technology (DT) 2.01 5. Big data visualization 6. Big data visualization (DT) 1.98 6. Artificial intelligence and machine learning 1.78
7. Providing a mobile app for customers 1.88 7. Social CRM technologies 1.87
1.74
8. Digital selling tools (DT) 1.86 8. Big data infrastructure for structured data 1.70
8. Scraping and web crawling 1.70
9. Multichannel capability 1.85 9. Advanced data analytics 1.66
10. Advanced data analytics (DT) 1.81 10. Social media for salespersons 1.62
10. Voice interfaces 1.62
Note: NB2B = 106 managers, NB2C = 63 managers. Gaps are calculated by subtracting the current development from the future importance. The Top 10 digital marketing capabilities
gap are reported.
44
Table 7: Agenda for future research
Themes (Gaps) Topics and Research Questions for Exploration
Channels
(ΔB2B = 1.23)
Social Media
(ΔB2B = 1.47)
Digital
Relationships
(ΔB2B = 1.40)
Digital
Technologies
(ΔB2B = 1.82)
How can industrial firms optimize the sales funnel in a multichannel environment?
Given the increasing use of mobile and social media, how can industrial firms integrate these
new channels into their existing channel structure?
How do search engine optimization and search engine advertisement contribute to customer
conversion and loyalty in an industrial context?
How can marketing automation platforms orchestrate multiple communication channels and
different campaigns for industrial firms?
How can corporate blogging generate value for industrial firms?
To what extent can instant messaging such as WhatsApp, Viber, and Telegram be used for
building and developing communications and rapport?
What are the microfoundations of social media use that enable industrial firms to engage in
successful social media conversations?
Which content management strategies should salespeople follow in their use of social media
for customer relationships (in particular on LinkedIn)?
Does social media use of industrial firms contribute to organizational performance? If so,
what are the magnitude and contingencies of the performance effect?
How can firms take advantage of positive customer reviews and react appropriately on
negative customer reviews in an industrial context?
Do paid social media and influencer marketing work for industrial firms
What are the contingent influences on the social media adoption by salespeople and customer
loyalty?
For which tasks can digital marketing capabilities be developed in industrial firms so as to
reduce the reliance on personal interaction?
What are the sources of resistance to developing digital capabilities at the individual
employee level?
What are the appropriate digital metrics for gauging the extent and quality of capabilities
underlying digital relationships along the industrial sales funnel?
What are the ‘new’ internal boundaries, interfaces, and interdependencies of the marketing
organization with other functional areas in industrial firms in determining decision rights over
digital marketing practices?
What form of digital relationships emerge from Internet-of-Things technologies? How do
these interactions manifest themselves in terms of the capability ecosystem supporting this
form of digital relationship?
Similar to consumer markets, can online product configurators be used for industrial products
to replace costly customization processes?
How can industrial firms integrate intelligent sales technologies into the sales channel to
nurture relationships and create a substantial advantage?
Given a higher willingness to do business via digital technology, how does the high-tech vs.
high-touch debate from the service context affect the industrial context?
In particular, can chatbots enhance professional relationships?
How can industrial marketers capture, organize, comprehend, and use complex big data from
multiple sources?
In the light of successful examples in consumer markets, how can industrial firms generate
value with Internet-of-Things technologies?
How can industrial firms use Virtual Reality to enhance experiences and to shift existing
business models into new competitive spaces?
45
Figure 1: Representation of the cumulative body of research on the four themes over time
Note: Selected thematic inflection points are reported.
46
Appendix: Final list of digital marketing capabilities in the survey instrument
Channels
Own company website
Use of third party e-commerce for purchasing
Use of third party e-commerce for selling
Use of two-sided platforms for purchasing (such as Alibaba, Amazon Marketplace
Use of two-sided platforms for selling (such as Alibaba, Amazon Marketplace)
Use of company-sponsored blogs as communication channel
Multichannel capability (coordination and integration of the online channel with other channels)
Use of mobile sales assistants
Providing a mobile app for customers
Social Media
Social media for organizational communication (such as Facebook, Instagram, or Twitter)
Social media for salespersons (such as customer acquisition and retention via LinkedIn)
Social CRM technologies (such as salesforce)
Own social media community
Reacting appropriately on negative customer reviews
Taking advantage of positive customer reviews
Digital Relationships
Digital supply chain coordination
Digital CRM technologies
Engaging in digital B2B communities
Video conferencing usage
Implementing digital change
Salesperson social media competency
Digital Technologies
Advanced data analytics techniques (data mining and predictive analytics)
Artificial intelligence and machine learning
Big data infrastructure for structured data (tables, records)
Big data infrastructure for unstructured data (speech, audio, video)
Big data infrastructure for machine generated data (sensors, RFID, devices)
Big data visualization
Block chain technology
Cloud computing
Digital selling tools
Internet of things technology (i.e., smart and connected products)
Machine-to-machine communication
Monitoring of social media data (blogs, tweets, social networks)
Scraping and web crawling
Virtual reality tools
Voice interfaces
47